OK. Welcome back, everyone. Let me take this off, if you can better understand me. The main purpose of today, is to at a couple of different synthetic many body systems that can be used to do quantum simulations. And then afterwards, we'll look at a little bit more detail about technologies needed for dealing with ultra cold atoms. We also have a section about atom light interaction that is a repetition reminder of what you have done in atomic and optical physics. But that's going to be a 20-30 minute overlap we have and that's about it. Then we go on with different things. OK, so let's get go in.

The first synthetic manoeuvring system, the one that we mostly deal with is ultra cold atoms. You've heard in typical optical physics. How you cooling down? You don't need to know how we get them. We can get something on the order of $10^5$ atoms. And that's big. That's the biggest synthetic many body systems we have at the moment. The other thing about these things is it's really atoms that were later on in the optical lattice move around, hop around; you really have mobile particles, which are great if you want to, simulate a charged dynamic stuff, moving around transport phenomena and so on. If you don't have that, if you only have systems that are static sitting here somewhere, but they have two spin states up and down the qubit, then of course, you can embed, say, information into a set of qubits in the same way that you can describe anything in the classical world with a set of bits. But there's a big overhead with that, so it's not great. Having mobile particles is great but one of the challenges that you have with cold atoms is that you really cool down to as cold as you can, but you never really achieve zero. There's always some residual entropy still in the system. And that's a problem. 

OK, so this is the main system for this lecture course. And now I go through a few other systems and I'll just give you the main gist of them. Don't worry if you don't get it all, the details of the other systems are not examined. Another one that people used a lot, especially in the past, is photons. They're reasonably easy to work with because you can do a lot of things, but just say I sent my photon through a beam splitter, trying to overlap several photons, I can build up complex topology circuits of what the photons are supposed to do, and I measure them at the end. The problem is it's hard to engineer interactions as you know through electrodynamics, which basically means you can't really do interacting models very well. If you want to have the photons interacting with each other, you have to transform them into something else.

Another manybody system is trapped ions, so you take atoms, took away one electron or give them one extra electron, so they electrically charged and that makes it easy for them to be trapped. And it's very easy to cool them down to the absolute ground state, and you can put them in a state where they are around five microns away from each other, which makes them easily addressable optically. And they still interact because they have these Coulomb interactions with the long range. The problem with these things is that, the numbers are limited and the position is frozen. You again admit to spin models, what each system is, a qubit can be spin up or spin down. It's not fermions really moving around. 

Another system that's now coming up over the last two years massively is Rydberg atoms, which is basically saying I take one atom and put it into a little optical tweezer and then I take hundreds of them, arrange them in whatever way I want, and then they copy very strong, long range interactions that we get. And this is not something that's still reasonably small system; 250 atoms was the record in December 2020. But it's very quickly increasing and a lot of people are betting that this is going to be one of the prime platforms for a quantum computer in the next five to 10 years. They can already do small things, they can do gates and so on. And they are steadily improving. These are the ones at the moment with the fastest growth trajectory. Again, they're typically frozen, which means spin models only. 

There's many others, like NV-centers, little nano defects in diamonds that have been studied a lot in this building, also by Lukin's group at Harvard. There's silicon qubits. There's atoms on surfaces, quantum dot arrays. There's many, many, many more systems.

I now want to talk a little bit more in detail about the superconducting circuits and ion traps. And then we go a little bit more into cold atoms.

Superconducting circuits, the way to think about them is to first think about a normal electrical circuit. You have an inductance and you have a capacitor and then you know the differential equation for this kind of classical oscillator. It's the same as a harmonic oscillator which you have all calculated in 1B, where all the states always have a splitting of one h. Now, this is not so nice if you want to have a qubit because all of these transitions are degenerate. If you try move something from state zero into state one, it can also be driven further into state to state three, state four and so on. In some sense, it's still too complex a system that's too many states. What can you do to get just two states? Make it anharmonic: put in a Joesphson junction. The idea for that one is that you have a superconductor on the left side, the superconductor on the right side and the little insulating tunnel barrier in the middle. If you now just go in with standard quantum mechanics to say, I have a wave function, I want to calculate the flow of particles, the probability flow of the wave function; you know, that's given by the creating of the phase. If you have a phase difference between left and right, that gives rise to a current that in this case actually acts is proportionate to the sign of this of this phase created. If you just crank, handle and say, OK, what does this mean for the voltage? Well, the energy (and hence voltage) is kind of given by the how fast the phase evolves, the frequency of the phase evolution. And if I put all of this together, massage it a little bit, I just get this
[equation] 
and I'll have an inductance in there. it's a nonlinear inductance, which is exactly the thing that I need to make a little resonating circuit. And if you do this, you just put this the so-called 
[transform geometry].
You put such a Josephson junction into such a little circuit. You get something where you oscillate just non harmonic. And that means that the frequency from zero to one is different than the frequency from one to zero. And that's what you need for your qubit, because your qubit is still just built by these two states zero and one. And you should try stuff with frequencies $\omega_{01}$, it cannot drive any further transitions. That's what you do in superconducting circuits. And the good thing about superconducting circuits is that you can put them on a chip. 
[pic]
The second one chip is a chip from Google that they published in 2020 which has 54 qubits on it, which was the world record at the time. And then if you can ask, OK, if I have these little qubits, what can I do with them? What I can do with single qubit rotations, which means I take something in the ground state and turn it into a superposition or into the excited state or any other state that I want. And it turns out I can do this with $99.8\%$ fidelity. The important point for a quantum computer doing a gate is, of course, the two of these things have to interact. They have to do two qubit gates.
[pic]
You can look at this. The two qubit error rate here is again below one percent, even if you are using many of them simultaneously,which means over 99 percent fidelity of the gate doing what it's supposed to do. It's pretty good. However, if I have that one percent error probability for two-qubit gate, if I have to run a calculation that consists of 100 steps, then to put, then the overall fidelity of the whole process is 99 percent to do the powerful and that then suddenly it's a pretty small number. This thing is pretty good, but these figures are still not good enough by far to do any meaningful calculations with it. This thing is on that scale, still light years away from doing anything that your mobile phone, for instance, can do. It only becomes better later on when you talk about error correcting, when you say, OK, can I do something I do in the classical system where I can correct for these errors so that not any error is a problem, but it just is a self-correcting code. Like what you do when you like, say, for instance, you have a credit card number, you type it in and then the computer says, OK, this isn't a valid number because the last two numbers are checks them. And if you have had a typo somewhere, it recognised there was a mistake and it recognises what you have to do to correct the mistake. You can do things with quantum error correction, which you would hear about in the quantum information lecture if you're interested, and that will then take these things over the finishing line. But the problem for that is that at the moment, people believe that you need something on the order of 100 or a thousand or maybe 10000 physical qubits to make one fully error corrected logical qubit. If you want to have something with whatever a thousand real logical qubits you would need, millions and millions of those things. We are far away from that. On the other hand, if you think of computer chips, how quickly they went from the thousands to a million to a billion chips, two billion transistors on one chip, maybe the scaling goes faster, maybe in a few years with you. It's an exciting time. 

The other one is ion traps. Ions have, for the moment, the world record for having the highest fidelity for doing these quantum gates. What you have is an ion trap. If you have a Paul trap that confines the ions together because they are charged particles, you can just confine them with electric fields. And they will always form a nice ion crystal where they stay separated from each other. You have an external trap pushing them together, but due to the Coulomb repulsion you have in charged particles they are pushed apart and you get kind of this thing. The position is fixed because of this, and you have distances on the order of a few micrometers. You can really focus a laser beam on this ion and read them out individually or do stuff to them individually. It's a great system for that. There's a couple of nice ways how you can do gates, basically what you do is you can shine in some fields, which sets off the whole thing in motion that it kind of oscillates in this direction. And then you can do something with the few that you want access to the motion covers to the entire state of the island. If this ion is in the excited state spin up logic one, then I would set the whole thing in motion. If it's not, it's not. And then if I now say something, if this one is motion, I bring it down. If not, I do nothing to it. Then I get the interaction between the two between these two ions and I can control which ions I want to interact with by saying I want to use which mode of oscillation of these things. And this works very, very, very well. They have three nines or more in the fidelity, so really, really good. The problem is that this limits the number of the ions that you can have, because if you have more ions, you have more of these normal modes. If you have two ions, you have two modes. If if one, you have one mode and then frequency space isn't that big. It becomes very hard to isolate or small to talk to them individually. And that's a problem. That's the limitation at the moment. 
[pic]
The idea is to try to go for some segmented traps, so we can just take these five islands, do something with them, which as they do and then you move two of those lines over to here, bring next three islands and have these five ions and do something to them. And we're going to segment mode. People have been developing this technology for the last 10, 12 years. They're making progress, they're getting there, but it takes longer than you would have expected, maybe. 

OK, any questions on this of our system so far? But please ask questions when something is unclear because it's important that everybody carries along. OK? 

This is now a reminder of at some light interactions. This is stuff that you have done in the atomic and optical physics, so I'm going through this reasonably quickly. Some of it will also come back in the problem set. The key thing is that we're mostly talking about optical photons, which is more or less around visible light into the infra-red, with wavelengths between a micron and a couple hundred nanometres. And the frequencies on the order of hundreds of terahertz. It's kind of important because we will later on also talk about microwave photons that use fibre find transitions. They are a lot of gigahertz or if you want to let go of spin states when you're off megahertz. Here we're talking about much, much, much, much bigger frequencies, hundreds of terahertz. You have no chance of really seeing the oscillation of the electric field because it's far too fast. The energies of those photons are then on the units of electron volts. And it turns out that the absorption and emission of this optical photons is a significant change for the atoms. These photons are a nice tool for us because $\hbar k$ is a nice momentum scale. You give the atom a kick off. It goes into a different momentum class, and that's exactly the kind of momentum that we are looking at. That's the good scale for us. We have typically two states, a ground state and an excited state, and they have an energy difference which gives rise to a frequency $\omega_0$. And then you shine in a laser with a frequency $\omega$, and the parameter we always will use is detuning $\Delta$, which is the difference between these two things. If Delta is positive, we call this blue detumed. That means that the frequency of the laser is higher than the frequency of the atom, or a photon has more energy than the atom could absorb. And the other case is red detuned, which is when the frequency of the light is lower than the frequency of the atom. And we assume our lasers are always to be perfectly a single frequency and to have enough intensity that you can use a semi classical description. You just assume it is the perfect coherent oscillating electric field. You don't care about photon shot noise and all of those kind of things. And that's a pretty good approximation for most of the things we do. 

And then there is if atoms interact with photons, with laser field, there is the three Einstein processes which are just important to keep in mind. The first one is stimulated absorption. If the atom is in the ground state and we have $N$ photons in the laser beam,
[equation]
it can absorb one of those photons. This is a coherent process and the atom goes into the excited state. The next process is stimulated emission, but the atoms in the excited state we have $N$ photons in the laser beam, and then the atom emits one photon coherently into the laser beams.
[equation]
And then last process of spontaneous emission, where the atom is in the excited state and emits a photon spontaneously in a random direction. It's important to intuitively understand the difference between cases two and three. What do you have in stimulated emission? It's a coherent process, it's driven by the laser field. If you don't have already $N$ photons in the mode, it won't happen. It's a coherent process, which means that all of the $N+1$ photons afterwards in the laser are indistinguishable. The photon coming out is also oscillating coherently. It is an important distinction to spontaneous emission, which are stimulated by vacuum fluctuations of the electric field where the photon goes in the random direction. And that's an important distinction that we would see the reason why this is important on the next slide. 

If you want to ask what kind of effect do I get out of this, there is two different regimes. The first regime is where $\Delta$ is small. This is basically resonant photons. And this is what we call the scattering regime. This is really where the atoms absorb photons of the laser beam. And then, of course, they coherently also emit some of them. There's a coherent oscillation going on, but on top of that, they can also absorb a photon from the laser beam and then randomly emit it in a different direction. This is what we call a scattering process. It's an incoherent process, and we call it fluorescence, because if you look at this from the side, you see the fluorescent light. Here you have a cloud of rubidium. Here, you send this red beam coming from here, which is a resonant.
[pic]
You would see the atoms glowing, glowing red because they absorb photons from here. And this kind of thing can be a pretty, pretty fast process because the lifetime of the excited state is typically in the order of 20 nanoseconds. The detuning has to be small compared to the inverse lifetime. If you have a lifetime of a nanosecond, the inverse of that is that kind of it's a gigahertz; 10 nanoseconds, 100 megahertz; 20 years, then OK, so you are off of megahertz. And this is the line of if you can think about this as the Heisenberg energy uncertainty.  
[equation]
You also know that $\Delta E \Gamma \gt \hbar$ which means that if the atom is only going to be an excited say for a very short time, that state appears to have large energy uncertainty. So you get a couple of megahertz linewidth. And this is, for instance, what they use in optical traps that probably Zoran has explained to you. We do laser cooling and scattering of the photons leads to transfer of momentum and all of that. And you also use it, as you would see in a minute for imaging. 

The second regime which is important for us is $\Delta \gt \gt \Gamma$ and that's usually what we call far-detuned, which basically means that the photon energy does not match at all the transmission frequency of the atom, and the direct consequence of that is that the atom cannot absorb the photons. The energy doesn't match. The atom cannot really absorb these photons, or only exponentially where, which means there is no spontaneous emission. You would you would be tempted to think that, OK, well, in this case, the atoms are just transparent for the photons, they just go through and nothing happens.
And if you think about the numbers that there's actually a good picture. However, two photon processes where you have a stimulated absorption,
followed by a stimulated emission that remains possible because what happens if you have a simulated absorption, you would go and observe a photon.
But you know, in a in a state that doesn't really have the energy, somebody's estate.
But if you do two steps in one, go up by a certain energy down by the same energy because you emit the photon back into the laser beam.
the photon has exactly the same energy that the photo that you originally absorbed, that's two fold the two process loop that is resonant.
You started in exactly the same state, you stop in exactly the same state as he started towards resitence, so it always happens.
And you can now think about, OK, you can have calculators in second order perturbation fury and yes, you can.
You can also calculate is exactly and this is now a process that's going to be
very important because this is the basis of optical tweezers of optical lattices.
How we actually trap and manipulate atoms. So.
The model Hamiltonian you would see, and you probably have seen in what you have seen,
it would be quantum mechanics, but we got some power to quantum mechanics is a two by two matrix.
we say the Crown State is the first state excited state. It's the second state.
And then the two between the tonin here has we set the Crown State Energy to zero because we
can just set the energy offset wherever we want by subtracting a constant part of the Evertonian.
We then say the energy of the excited state is now because we do something with a quarter rotating wave approximation.
It's actually the difference between the photon energy and the atomic energy.
it's just the tuning because we do this in the presence of this classical photon field.
here we have to the tuning we have tried to be tuning because we have over two one half in front.
That's just a convention and we have to transition how fast we go from one state to the other state.
The Robbi frequency omega on the off diagonal.
If you have not seen this before, you can just think about this in an intuitive way of saying that that hurts me,
but very resonant is unique, and Omega tells me how strong my coupling is.
this wabi frequency is proportional to the strength of the electric field times the diplomatic settlement dipole moment of the atom,
which comes from atomic physics.
For our purposes, we just say it's a no, we have it, and we know that we have this wabi frequency which scared the electric field strength.
And now, if you have this, you have no telling you this into a true matrix.
You can diagonals it something that you cannot do what you will do in the problem said if you'd analyse that,
you get your energies, which look this. They have this offset of Delta, and then you have the square root terminal,
and then you can say now I can calculate what is the energy of an atom instead Wednesday to
interest rates in the presence of the light field minus the energy without light fields.
omega equals zero is intensity zero, no electric field, no light field and finite omega means in the presence of the light field.
And what you would also do in the problems that you would see, it's five lines of calculation or less,
you would see that in the regime where Delta is large despite a huge regime, this did light shift of the crown.
It goes omega not squared over delta. omega not squared goes epsilon, not square, because the field strength squared.
it just goes the intensity of fluid.
what you would see and is a slight shift, you see that you get an energy shift of the atom that's proportional to the intensity of the light.
Divided by the. the intuitive picture for this is that the actor, if the tuning is negative, that the shift is negative,
get them is attracted by gratitude, light field and what gets sucked into the point of where you have the highest intensity.
Because the test is negative potential, you can calculate this shift easily in second order perturbation theory.
You can also think about, OK, what happens with the phase of a pendulum? Wave it below the transition frequency.
I lower the frequency even further, so I suck it down, so I lower its energy.
it gives me this attractive force.
And that's the effect of that's the consequence of the or the basis, I should say, of all kind of optical tweezers.
If you have an optical light field, you have something that has a diamond oscillating dipole moment, a polarised ability,
a little sphere of plastic or whatnot, or a DNA molecule or whatever you want, it will be sucked into the maximum of the intensity.
That means you can move lightly, you can pick stuff up and move it around.
The problem is, if you do, this is a big thing, of course, that will also scatter photons and thereby heat up and you might burn it.
But if you do all of this with an atom, it's perfectly fine because the atom cannot absorb the energy any other way than what we have discussed here.
that's how it works. OK. we have this slight shift.
Which is proportional to intensity over retuning.
You can also say, well, every once in a while, the atom can also go through really excited state and can scuttle reform.
And that's of course, something that we don't want. There are atoms are very, very cold today.
Very, very small momentum. And in October 4th and they get the we kick the photons momentum.
We don't want it.
But luckily for us, if you calculate the scattering rate in the same, which you may have not shown this year, you get intensity of a delta squared.
he could overdo it you get over that squared, which means you can always just say, Okay, let's increase my did you go far, far away?
And also, at the same time, increase the power of my laser and you will you get a nice classical potential for the atoms,
but the potential is just proportional to the intensity of the light field without having significant photons scattering.
this means for his little feeble atoms, we need to use 50, 60 watt lasers.
Couple of hundred nanometres tuned. these are lasers when you focus them down,
anything you're putting that focus could be copper could be steel will melt because it will absorb the energy.
But because the atoms can't absorb the energy, because it doesn't match the transition frequency, they're happy.
And there they just see this week potential that we can use to confine them.
you hit the atom of the hottest thing you have and you just happy about it. OK.
the way you do this is if you say I take a normal laser beam,
you would typically have a caution be what would the transverse profile looks aggression if you have delta negative gratitude.
That means you get an attractive caution type potential deposit the we want to accumulate down in here.
If you take a polluted you and laser beam, you have to have a sign of the things that are positive.
the whole light shift is not positive. You can have reports of potentially wants us to push the atom out.
And if you just want to trap atoms, this one is easier. But this one gets you a lot of flexibility of creating interesting configurations.
OK. A typical thing to do.
Yes. How do you make exhaustive profile positions based with the laser?
OK. That's actually turns out to be the easiest thing ever because most lasers would you stay with your caution beam?
If you look at the Maxwell's equations at the way equations coming out of that impressive approximation,
you will realise that you get the cautions times to put,
you know, the characteristic polynomial as the icon functions and you, we realise that this is the lowest or the LIGO's beam.
It's the quad state solution for that. many lasers would use them away.
This is also the beam because it's fulfils the equation is to be met, at least diffraction.
if I take a beam and focus it, send it out for a long time, everything that's not going to deflect off faster than the ghost mode will expand.
it's kind of self-cleaning. Also the mode that's transported in optical fibre is the Gorshin mode.
what we typically tend to do is we send our lasers all through an optical fibre and what comes out of an optical single mode.
Fibre is a very, very nice caution beam. You can, of course, mess it up, but if you do it well, you get a nice caution.
that's the standard thing that almost all of laser optics always use as caution beams.
And then if you wanted to have items for, for instance, what we typically do is we use a wavelength of 10, 60, four nanometres.
You would see this number a lot, and that's just purely for technical reason because it happens to be sighted at this wavelength.
You can build very powerful lasers and then you take two of those beams,
you overlap them in space that they cross each other and you have to call a cross beam Typekit web.
And you have strong, attractive potential in here, and that's a nice pocket to put your atoms in.
We'll see a bit more about this a bit later. Just to be honest and light shift is proportional to the intensity of the jury,
and you'll do the calculation to see why that is the case on the problem said it's straightforward.
OK. how do we measure something about our atoms?
How do we can improve them in any way we can't really measure a current or put a voltage metre to them?
What do you do? Well, it turns out in almost all cases, you actually and you and you probably atoms, are you?
You probe deposition and you do that using resonant light. it's the cartoon I had before.
You atoms are somewhere doing something and then you send in a resonant laser beam from the left.
Then you can do two things. You can say this do absorption. Let's put the camera here.
And then if there is atoms, there would be less light coming through and I can see this kind of shadow.
If you want that, the cost would see this in the next slide in more detail.
The other thing you can do is you can say, let's observe this, put a camera here to the site and up off the fluorescence.
Observe the photons that scatter. And you can say, Oh, the photons are coming from there, so there must be atoms do.
that's the way how you do almost all of the measurements and cold atoms, but many other properties,
whatever you want you're interested in, you can always cast it in that language and do it with this measurement trick.
for instance, if you will see in the next slide how you can measure momentum, how you committed velocities of the particles.
If an atom absorbs a given light or not depends on its initial state,
which means you have state selective imaging, if you have a different type of fine state,
you can put an imaging frequency that's resonant for the one, but not the other hyper state that gives you a state with many things you can do with.
how can you, as an example, major velocities.
This is the soccer time of flight method that you will see a lot and you also probably have an atomic and optical physics.
The idea is that a have the atoms sitting in a trap and what I do a time check with zero.
I just switch off everything after jumping potentials that can instantly switch them off,
something you can't do of electrons, for instance, where you can't switch off the crystal potential.
But the potential is just the laser beam.
You just switch it off very quickly and then let the atoms do the thing, which basically means they do two things.
First of all, they fall down on the gravity and you let them fall down for something tens of milliseconds.
And at the same time, they will also spread out because the atoms are not standing still. They all have their initial velocities.
And then they will just move velocity, you wish that they had a time to work with zero.
And we just assume that we can neglect interactions and any potential during the time of flight time of flight.
they just fly off rooftop velocities they had initially.
And then what you do is after they've flown out for a while, they are big because they have lots of trees spread out.
Then you accent in this sense that this resonant light beam come from here and you measure what you get on a camera.
you kind of get on a camera, you get the image of the density of the atoms.
Let's look about this in a bit more detail. The first question is where does a particle end up after some time of light?
Well, the position after time of flight is the initial position, plus the velocity times time of light.
Of course. What a physics.
If you wait long enough, if your time of flight is long enough, the second term would be much, much bigger than the first term.
you can elect the first time, it's not. This is analogous if he wants to the far field diffraction and optics where you say, OK,
my slip is very small and adjust to the spreading momentum space where the light goes.
Which then means that the image after a long enough time of flight when I can
neglect the it's not basically shows me the velocity or momentum distribution.
just let the response time of flight take a picture,
and it tells me how fast the items who are testing the velocity distribution, which is a pretty, pretty powerful technique.
The way you do it is in detail is that you take two images because we are kind of interested in the shadows.
we take one image, we just say the blue image. We just have all the atoms.
That's just the laser laser beam we sent through here to chance onto the camera.
Then the second image is roughly atoms being present, and then we get our there's no atoms, so we get the same light as before,
but in the middle, where those atoms, we get less light because some of the light was absorbed by the atom that was passing through.
And then you look back to electromagnetism, you get palombi absorption law,
and you know, that's the ratio of the intensity with the atoms divided by Revathi atoms.
It's given by the exponent is an exponential decreasing function depending on how many atoms to light has encountered.
If each atom absorbs one percent of the light,
then you get this exponentially decreasing number or decreasing amount of light with increasing atom numbers.
And another crucial thing is that what you measure here and see is what we call the column density because you get this two dimensional image.
And if there's not much light hitting this full picture here, then you know there are many atoms along the path of this probe,
but you don't know where the atmosphere here or here in the middle or here at the edge. You don't know that.
You don't get this information. You only get this two dimensional projection. what you're really measuring is what we call the quantum density.
And see, we just the 3D density integrated along the line of sight.
And these are the pictures that we're going to look at a lot. Questions up to your.
OK. Then so, for instance, one thing that we can do from such a thing.
I mean, this kind of looks a caution.
We can directly measure the temperature from this, we just say, okay, if we pick the particles being an ideal guess.
We can say that's their distribution overall of their kinetic energy is just a vessel box with distribution exponential of minus energy of activity.
If we then say that, well, kinetic energy goes these, create one off and be square again, classically simple physics.
We get the velocity distribution that the number of particles of a given velocity goes to each of the minus one half and VBScript of activity.
this is a caution distribution at the roof of the distribution stomach is made by TV,
which basically means if I just measured its caution distribution after a long time of flight.
I can just visit a whiff of this distribution and that's directly proportional to the
square root of the temperature so we can get all the temperature of these clouds very,
very simply. And, OK, so that's kind of how we measure them.
And then we should say what happens if he could them down. And this depends on what kind of evidence we have.
We have two classes of atoms. We have bosons and fermions. If we have bosons, we know that if we go to zero, you know,
from statistical mechanics and also from atomic optical physics, if they were from a Bose-Einstein condensate.
all of the bosons would go into the lowest state. You also noted for fermions that can't happen, because if the party principle.
if you from unique items, you could affirm your seat and they will form up the lowest states if you have an ethics.
Atoms can be if was only confirming Ionic, which when you have depends on the spin, if you have an integer spin there bosons,
it was thought that just fermions because you're neutral atoms, you kind of know that the number of protons is the same as the number of electrons.
it's whether it's from unit of boson just depends on the number of neutrons.
If the number of neutrons is even, they form up to an integer spin, everything else isn't.
It's just been. You can observe if the number of neutrons is not, you could have Fermi on.
And that's very nice because it's very convenient for us because, for instance, of potassium,
we can use potassium 39, which is kozanic or potassium 40, which is from ionic.
if the same laser system, just dialling into one isotope shift,
we can do fermenting experiments in both experiments on the same machine basically shot to shot.
You can say that's two.
That's two fermions, which is pretty powerful and gives you a lot of flexibility of what you can do with relatively modest investment.
if you have phones, you probably have seen these pictures before.
If you have phones and you could have done so from here, you hear from you to hear you get colder,
there is going to be this Bose-Einstein condensation does phase to phase transition and we're talking about the fascination aspect more.
Next lecture. And you know, if you can see this directly in the momentum distributions,
so reasonably hot clouds, so above the critical temperature is purely thermal.
this looks a caution. Then you can calculate the both the distribution function, or you can just think about this intuitively,
you can say that even now just below, it's so I have a partially condensed cloud with some particles of condensed eyebrows.
Not yet I get what we call a bimodal distribution.
you have two scores and background still sit here and give us very sharp peak on top of the quotient back.
Want this by modality is the thing that people, typically when they to call,
let them experience first look for because it's a very clear signature.
Just by looking at the picture saying, OK, now I go from thermal to having a b c you do.
And they never go to with zero with the thermal background discussion back to you is fully gone,
and I just have this moment to pick this one macroscopic wave function.
And what this means, how it is, how we can think about this first position in a theoretical way.
We talk a little bit more about next lecture.
If you think of ultracold fermions, on the other hand, life is a bit more subtle because for fermions, if you have not interacting fermions,
there is no phased in and if you put them down, it's just that you are familiar with the distribution in a minute.
The second thing is for fermions because of the poly principle, we want it.
We need to use more spin states, more High-Performance states to Aberfan states if he wanted to interact.
Same spin fermions content direct. It's partially Bloched. We'll see also see that in a few that in a few lectures.
The good thing about fermions is that by definition, there was richer than it was ionic systems because two fermions can make a boson.
if they take a molecule out of two from unique atoms, I get a bosnich molecule.
But I can't make fermions out of bosons, so fermions are intrinsically more powerful in that sense.
And the last thing why we should care about elect from unique items is, of course, because the electrons are firmly on.
a lot of the conscious matter physics Natalie is more interesting, closer connected to fermions, which are confirming.
if we have fermions, we have to form a direct distribution, which you all have seen in statistical physics,
and this distribution is it's to with zero has this sharp kink.
you start off all the states being occupied up to the Fermi energy diplomacy boom and then the top is down to zero.
And if you increase temperature from year to year increase temperature, you can see how this gets Wolverine's movements moving.
I see these cuts and kindness matter physics. Yeah, you have a whiff on your off cavity and then eventually turns out it goes over into an
exponentially decreasing distribution that makes the distribution for classical particles.
what this one really highlights is that if I take fermions,
there's no phase and there's nothing sudden those sudden changes that just smoothly gets steeper,
steeper, steeper, steeper and they add up with my firm.
You see, the probably direct distribution is, of course, also discussed a lot and kind of metaphysical.
what we have and we have to fermions and what to do with this because they want to get you gets to some numbers.
We take the Fermi energy, which is basically given by the density to the power of two thirds.
And one of the models. And this is that. We could take more advanced quantum physics if you have.
If you have a certain amount of fermions, then you have to occupy a certain amount of momentum,
states, if you have more firmness, you have to go to higher and higher momentum to occupy them all.
And that's intuitively speaking why if you have a higher density of fermions,
you will have a higher from energy because we're talking about kinetic energies,
it makes sense that also, if the mass gets more kinetic, energy gets bigger at the Fermi, energy gets bigger.
the Fermi energy is the highest occupied energy at zero,
which is the chemical potential also it's equal to or that's the thing that comes in this equation.
Here is the point where this curve drops down. And yet the temperatures we're using, here's the Fermi temperature,
that's a typical scale if you use a lot to compare our temperatures to at the Fermi temperatures just given by the Fermi energy divided by carbon.
whenever you have these things, energy up temperature, they're related by Cabe.
OK. why do we talk about ultracold atoms?
Why do we have to get to ultracold atoms? And these are the equations we just had in the previous slide.
We cannot compare ultra cold atoms to what happens in the kind of system.
If you compare the masses and electronics when you order 10 to the minus five of the mass of an atom,
one factor a thousand to get from the elephant to the proton, and then you have 100 protons and neutrons in your thing.
you could affect two to five. This is a factor of 10 to the minus five for you. If you ask what is the density of the electrons in the system?
Well, a typical scale would be 10 to 20 three per cubic centimetre, a ball of substance.
On the other, we would see that the density for atoms would be much, much, much lower order 10 to 14 per cubic centimetre.
Gives you another factor of 10 to the six,
which basically means if you compare now the Fermi temperature of electrons divided by the Fermi temperature and cold atoms.
You can apply to big factor of 10 to the 11,
which basically means that the Fermi temperature for electrons in the metal is typically the order of 10000 to 100000 Kelvin.
Why the Fermi temperature we have in cold atoms is on the order of Michael Cohen.
that means code Etan's, because these things are heavier and therefore slower, and they're living at a much, much lower density.
We have to cut them a lot. We have to cut it down to well below a micro carbon nanotube in temperatures
to simulate what happens in a Kleynhans metal system at room temperature. Because the elections are much faster, much lighter and much, much denser.
that's what we have to do everything we've ultracold atoms, even if we want to study room temperature, this matter physics.
This begs an obvious question. Why do we not just increase the density of atoms?
Why do we not just take this one and bring it up to 10 trillion cubic centimetre?
What do you think? Why does this not work? Public frequencies.
Like what? That could be a case, but it's not a limitation because we don't arrest them at frequencies.
Coalition losses? Yes, exactly. The main thing is that if I take a bunch of atoms, a bunch of, say, potassium atoms,
the crown state for that system, it's notable that Einstein condensate or Fermi guess the quantity of that system.
Is this a Bloch of metal? All right.
We are starting with a very hot gas and then recruiting it down a lot.
Normally when you think about, OK, I take my gas and cooler than it does to liquid, and that liquid then freezes into a solid.
That's what I would normally expect to happen. why does this not happen in cold atoms?
The answer is that cold atoms in the end are metastable.
They would, when they come together, form molecules, and then these molecules can collide together and form clusters.
And that's how you would start to form a solid. That's a process that would happen in principle.
The key thing the saving grace for us is that this first step, the molecule formation.
It doesn't need two atoms to come together. It turns out it needs three atoms to come together as a three body process.
The reason is that these two particles come together. They bind and the binding energy gets free.
And despite the energy of Cosmos, goes sour, so it causes kinetic energy of the molecule flying away.
And then Momentum Conservation toted it only as positive as a third particle, which flies in the opposite direction to conserve momentum.
momentum conservation dictates that this must be a three party process.
While at the same time, the conditions that we need for the stuff to formalise the normal atom atom collisions is a two body process.
the ratio of two body to three body processes depends on the density.
if you take the density, the ratio or the the rate for three body processes,
it's the density squared where the weight for two body process case the density.
if you go for a low enough density to body processes will win and three body processes will be very aware,
if you have a low density, two particles can come together, but it's unlikely for three particles to come together.
And that basically limits the use of a density to stuff on the order of 10 to 14 cubic cubic centimetre.
Otherwise, three body losses take over and the system is not stable enough. And that means that we have to live down here with the nano koven life.
Which is OK.
if we have to confirm use just to show you some numbers and some pictures we typically again have on the order of hundreds of thousands.
We could reach 15 years ago to achieve below 50 percent.
Nowadays, people can reach on the order of four percent and the way they measure temperatures is again using time of light.
what is what you do is you take an harmonic trap, a dipo trap. What what does this now do?
Time of light afterwards? And then you can. As for the average and you get a cloud that looks this, so it's decaying down this.
And all you have to do pretty careful fitting if you fit this form of caution you would do for a classical guest, you see it doesn't fit.
You see if less particles see in the middle and you would expect for a classical cast that's already the first onset of the body Bloching.
You can't have all of those particles at low density stay at low or mentally get pushed to higher and higher memento.
And then those extra particles kind of like, show up here and you get this sharper edge that you also can see and could see in the Thomas Fermi thing.
if I go back to this slide here, this one. Sorry, clinging to past.
No, where are we? This one, so what you get is that I have this very fluffy cloud with a proper minimum distribution,
a classical regime, which then gets deeper and deeper and deeper.
But you could also see it gets there's a d one for a larger and larger area, gets deeper around here.
And that's exactly kind of what you see here in this picture. It gets kind of deeper here than this would, of course, in the case of pastor here.
Now there's two different fit functions in here how you can fit them in two different ways.
And this one gives you 30 percent, the other one gives you six percent.
And even if you look at very, very carefully here, you would say, well, maybe the six percent fits better, but the difference is very small.
it becomes very hard to measure those things very exactly because you're getting pretty close to the targets you were promising.
You might ask yourself, why do I not then see a sharp edge at the Fermi energy?
The reason simply is that this is in an ironic trap we have taken in homogeneous density profile.
You have a high density in the middle and lower densities at the edges.
you have to average of all of those density profiles and you do this in America and then out comes a curve exactly this.
You can measure, can you use so-called stone imaging to image in a different spin state separately?
what you basically do is you take a magnetic field gradient during this time of light and then because a different spin,
states have different magnetic moments that can be facilitated by experiment, they go on different trajectories.
And here, you know, you see, OK, this is a false colour plot.
You see one spin state and spin state showing up here so we can measure those things also in their.
OK, so this was a whistle stop tour about everything with gold atoms, how cold you are, how you measured them and so on.
And this was done very, very quickly, I know.
But it was done so quickly because most of you would have seen this in other lectures before, and it's the typical task of doing a mine.
A topic in the end is you connect bits and pieces from different lectures together,
and then you have the foundation of which then you can, like, build new physics.
next week, we're starting to go slower because we're starting to get new stuff that you will have not have seen before.
last slide for today is just a quick comparison.
If I compare continents matter physics with cold atoms kind of matter physics is, of course, much, much, much bigger systems.
We only have 10 to the five. These are charged particles. We have long range interactions with Lawrence Falls.
We don't have them because it's neutral atoms. They are homogeneous genius.
That makes life hard for us. The densities we discussed, the temperatures we discussed, but we have a few crucial advantages.
The main advantage that we have is that because we are at much lower densities and heavier particles, our timescales are very, very different.
if you think about a hopping scale for us as milliseconds, two seconds, so we can be the observed in an equilibrium dynamics,
we can observe them look in real time how they move around while this is happening far too far too fast.
In the real election system with elections,
just we just do something that you already have a firmer state where we can really see how firm a state, for instance, forms.
We also see later on that we don't have an isolated system, which means we don't have a externally imposed temperature.
It's not. We have a crisis that where we say, OK, this is going to be one curve, five and whatnot.
The temperature is kind of something that's kind of a self-consistent Sophie emerging temperature coming out of this many buddy system,
and we'll discuss this and let the lecture. And it's a nice connexion to statistical physics.
What do you do if you don't have a quantum IQ ensemble? If your system is really isolated and it's not in contact with the outsite world?
And we can have very, very clean systems where we don't have this or we don't have phonons,
which is very different from what you have in the better system,
all of this dirt is always complicating the picture you want and you can't do much about it.
OK. And basically, that's it for today. Thank you very much.
Two quick announcements. We'll start next Tuesday organising the organising the tutorials and talk
about when will they happen and also when will happen the journal clubs. Also next Tuesday, we will put our next Tuesday or Wednesday.
We put the first footprints head on. the lecture will take place in the first six weeks of term.
But then the Joy Luck Club some time ago also go into Week seven and eight.
Because that is, it's easier for you to discuss those things and have opportunities to discuss your problems after you've seen all of the lectures.
Otherwise, you end up with the situation that you can't really do much about the last two
lectures because there's no chance to have problems on them or to this custom.
it's a slow start regarding problem sets that they pick up a bit towards the end.
And I put today up the scripts of last year so far have not changed anything in this light, so there's no need to put up new slides.
The same as last year's. There is a problem, apparently with the recording.
We'll hope to solve this out.
We had a technician in here yesterday, yesterday at work today, but it doesn't work against what you have to keep looking at that.
If I can't get these recordings to work, I put up the recordings I did last year.
Which I think also a very useful resource. OK.
That's it. Thank you. He's at.
