Hello and welcome to lecture five of the quantum simulation course. Today's topic is both on lattices, and then we would talk about how we can introduce the interactions between both zones, which would then be the full Bose-Hubbard Hamiltonian. And then we will look at the ground state phase diagram of this Hamiltonian. And we see the first transition from a superfluid into a Mott insulator.

OK, let's get started. We start with a quick reminder of Bloch waves from last weak, basically because our lattice potentials are periodic. The Bloch theorem applies and all of the states will be Bloch waves. We'll have energy gaps in the same way as solid-state physics. And the easiest way to think about these Bloch waves and to think about how we can represent them is to start by looking at the photons again, and to say that the new thing in the lattice is that an atom with momentum $p$ can absorb a photon from the left beam, changing momentum by $\hbar k$ basically. Then the overall state is given as a superposition of plane waves, and the only task that remains, which you are doing in the problem set, is the calculation of these coefficients in front of this.
[eqn]
And this has very important consequences and the very intuitive way of thinking about the system, because when we do time of flight, when we say, okay, how do we take a measured momentum of a particle. We basically do this by this time of flight imaging where we switch off suddenly the lattice, which basically means we project our Bloch wave, we've acquired momentum $q$ onto the constituent plane waves. And that means we would see for each Bloch wave a set of peaks at discrete points after time of flight. And then we said, okay, we'll also want to move over to a bunch of functions because we said very often it's inconvenient to have momentum space representation, because the interactions are local, because the real space potentials, traps and other things that we might want to add, are local. We will want to have a real-space representation. And all of you have seen these Wannier functions before. I should maybe say a few more words about them. The first thing is, again, the reminder that the Wannier functions are defined as a discrete sum of the waves and we're basically doing this just in a given event. Do we get the Wannier function in this band? We don't take all of them, just the ones in one Bloch wave. And these Wannier functions are localised around two sites. In the permanent atomic limit to some here turns into an inegral, which is not clear to everyone. The reason for this simply is that very often if you do a numerical calculation, you will only say, I don't want to calculate an infinitely large lattice, I want to calculate the lattice with say a hundred lattice sites, which is down in the big box potential. This means it makes sense to only have one hundred Wannier functions.

You can think of a particle in a box. The ground state will have one momentum $k$ and another at $-k$, you can't fit all others in there because you have this box. And the same thing, of course remains true if you have a lattice. If the lattice lives in a finite box, you only have discrete momentum states that are possible. These $q$ here are discrete and then you have a sum over discrete momenta. And in the thermodynamic limit, if your box becomes infinitely big, you go from the box into freespace. Just keep lattice potential there. Then this turns into a continuous distribution. And you go from the sum to an integral. And the last thing that I was making a point about, which I think is very important, is to say that the Wannier functions form an orthonormal basis of the full single-particle Hilbert space. That basically means that whatever physical situation you have, you can describe this all in plain waves. It's a valid basis, but it's a very inconvenient basis because momentum is not conserved. You can describe it in Bloch waves, which is maybe for many things a better basis because the quasimomentum is conserved. And the band index very often is conserved because very often you don't have situations with interband scattering. You can also very often do everything in this basis of Wannier functions. It's also a complete basis because you have these nice properties that these are the most local functions.

If we go away from all of the maybe more abstract definitions you can really think of, a Wannier function as having half an atom in the lowest band, and that atom is localised on one lattice site $i$ that this is in, this one you from the atom is this Wannier function centre. And this lattice said if the atom was to be formed on that lattice site, then it would be the Wannier function centred around this lattice site.
[pic]
And if we wouldn't if it would be in a different band, then it would be the Wannier function of two different bands, which would have a different look. If you think of relatively deep lattice, where each lattice site is a harmonic trap, then the lowest Wannier function becomes a Gaussian and the first excited Wannier functions become the excited states of the harmonic oscillator. And for those that are maybe a bit more mathematical minded, here's another way how you can think about this. If you say I want to have a localised particle with space now outsite of the lattice in freespace, you would say the most localised to I can write down is the Delta function, $\delta(x-x'). And you know that you can express this as an even superposition of all of the plane waves each of the $x$. Now, the same thing is true, you should look to the basis transformation from the plane waves into the Bloch waves, because we said that the Bloch waves are often the basis of the full Hilbert space, the same way as the plane waves. I can expect the same thing. The delta function I can express as a sum of all of the Bloch waves. And now if you now say that this has restricted us now to a single band, there's no sum over all of the bands in here anymore. And just looking at one single and then you can think of this as, say, I have less momenta at my disposal because many of the plane waves are known what they are, many of the Bloch waves are not there because they live in different bands, which means that I have less momentum states so they can play with less basis states of which I can make a localised function. The function would be less localised. It would still be localised around a single lattice site, but it would not be as localised as a delta function. And the function I get is then the Wannier function.

And the last step that we did in the last lecture was to say no, that we have to as basis of maximally localised orbital so of the wavefunction that describe a particle sitting on one lattice site in the lowest band, and we can then write down the Hamiltonian for such a particle.
[a dagger]
creates the particle Wannier state onsite. And then the Hamiltonian fundamentally describes the two terms. We have the kinetic energy, which is basically saying the particles moving around. And we say particles move from site $j$ to site $i$. The summation is just over pairs of nearest neighbours, because we are in a so-called tight-binding regime where particles can only hop from one site to its neighbouring site. We also said that in a homogeneous system, the second term is unimportant because it's the same energy, irrespective of where the particles are. And the last term is just a total particle number times the chemical potential. This is the term that you get in the canonical ensemble to look at how many particles you have affects the system. And we'll talk more about this term in the next lecture or so. And then the only thing that we need is the tunnelling term. It's basically saying, OK, how likely is it or how fast is it? What is the rate for particles going from one site to the next?
[eqn, eqn]
And this is not a full Hamiltonian to describe single particles in the lowest band of an optical lattice. And the next challenge will be to look into interactions in this Hamiltonian. And if we add those, then we end up with the full Bose-Hubbard model. What you can see now here on this plot is the molecular potential between two atoms. You basically see the potential energy $V$ as a function of the distance between two particles. And these molecular potentials, they're obviously pretty complicated. And that gives rise to the richness of molecular physics. We now need to find a very simplified description of this that we can use to study manybody physics. For this, it's important to think a little bit about these potentials.
[pic]
On the one hand, for long distances here, you have a Van der Waals interaction
[eqn]
because this is an induced dipole interaction at large distances, because the atoms are both electrically neutral. The minimum distance of this potential here, what the distance of the minimum is on the order of 10 angstrom. A few nanometres at most. And then we have a very a fast rising potential on the insite, which is the exchange interaction at small distances. Simply said, if the atoms get very, very close to each other, the electron clouds start to overlap. And then both the Pauli principle and also the Coulomb interaction between the electrons means that there must be a very strong repulsion. The crucial thing to see here is the typical distances are very, very small. And in fact, the range of this potential is really important, is typically much, much, much smaller than both the de Broglie wavelengths of the particles (because the particles are very slow, because we are very cold temperatures) and the typical distance between the particles. Basically, if you want all of our physics happens on this scale. But then the interactions length is much, much, much, much shorter. And that gives rise to a very, very strong simplification which is basically saying that we can replace the real potential by an effective contact potential. The particles only interact if they are at the same position.
[eqn]
And in the future we mostly talk about different regimes, meaning different scattering lengths are positive, negative and so on. If I take a typical BEC, for instance, Rubidium 87, one of the easiest atoms to condensate. I have a scattering length on the order of 100 Angstrom, and the Bohr radius $a_0$ is half an angstrom, more or less.

The other thing that's very important and very powerful for cold atoms is that very often we can use so-called Feshbach resonances to tune this $a$ by changing the magnetic field. We just apply a different magnetic field and we can get a different $a$ (scattering length). The effects are important in molecular physics, and I'm not going to go into details here for the sake of time, but you can think of this very often, that the magnetic field is just a joining up with which you can join the sign and the strength of the interaction. You can have not interacting atoms with parts of attractive, strongly interacting, weakly interacting atoms just by dialling one of the features. It doesn't work for all atoms but for many cases. Like, for instance, potassium atoms where you have nice resonances where you can really tune the interaction at will.

OK. How can we now take this and introduce this into our Hamiltonian, which we have written down in second quantised notation. If I take the general case of a generic two-particle interaction term, the energy is given by half the integral over all of space for the position of particle one, and all of space for a position of particle two. And then I have my two particles. What we do is we effectively destroy the particles at these two positions and then we create the particles. Now in this case at the same positions.
[eqn]
if I have two particles at the positions $r$ and $r'$, then their interaction energy is given by the potential $V(r-r')$. And this term, of course, can be pretty complicated and can be pretty unwieldy, too, to use. But we can simplify it a lot because we can say, okay, we go to this effective potential.
[eqn]
We say we use a contact potential $g\delta^3 (r-r')$ in 3D, which simplifies things a lot because that basically removes one of those integrals over $r'$. And we're basically left with
[eqn: G halftimes integral over R Dega upsite. Dega upsite upsite.]
it basically says only when two particles are at the same position would they have an interaction energy $g$. The half is there because they have two operators and therefore can have two possibilities of how I can have these two particles. It cancels out if I have this indistinguishibility argument.


OK. And now we want to describe this generic interaction term in our bases of Wannier functions. You're basically saying, destroying a particle at position $r$ is the same as destroying a particle in a superposition of all of those $a_{i,n}$ weighted by the Wannier function at this potential.
[eqn]
And as I said before, the Wannier functions are a full, complete, orthonormal basis which can express everything. Also, the $\delta$-function as a superposition of all of those Wannier functions. We can do this and we get a term that's quite a bit more unwieldy again, because now we still have our integral over $\psi^+ \psi^+ \psi \psi$, and each of those terms have been expressed as a sum of all of those Wannier functions with the creation annihilation operators.
[eqn]
And this term is, of course, pretty unwieldy, and the main point to see from this term is that because you have different $n$ in here, because you have one independent $n$ and independent $r_i$ for each of the four operators that you have to put in. It tells us that the interactions can, in principle, couple different bands and lattice sites.

Here's the unwieldy term again. And now we simplify it again because we retain the biggest term only, and the biggest term is the one where all of the $i$s are the same and the $n$s are the same. In addition, we assume that the particles are all in the lowest band, that only the lowest band is occupied. And then we can basically say, okay, well, instead of having all of those sums over $i$ and $n$, we only have one sum over $i$.
[eqn]
And this is now neat, because if we now have the points that all of the Wannier functions around all of lattice sites are the same, it simplifies even further because we can basically and say which lattice site to look at doesn't matter, and you can define a new constant $U=g\int d^3 \vec{r} |w_0(\vec{r}|^4$. And then the last thing that we want to deal with this,
[eqns]
And for this, we just have to remember that $a$ and $a \dagger$ are bosonic operators. The commutator equals one. I can basically white this now as
[eqn]
which means in total, the interaction energy for bosons in an optical lattice is given by
[eqn]
It depends on your Wannier function; the bigger it is in the middle, the bigger the integral becomes. And this is now a very simple result. It makes sense to think about it a little bit. $n_i$ is the number of atoms on site $i$ and what it basically tells us is that each of the atoms on lattice site $i$ will interact with the $n-1$ other atoms and at the site. Now, because the particles are indistinguishable, the interaction of particles 1 with 3 and 3 or 1 is the same thing, so we have a $1/2$ for double counting.

You might want to know, how does this play out for thousands of particles? And the answer is very simple. If you have many, many particles in the same mode, you basically get that the interaction energy just goes as $n^2$ which is consistent with the Gross-Pitaevskii equation. But if you go down to very small numbers, remember it's an operator; it is really the projection of the particle numbers that you get. Then the quantised nature of the particle number is important.

The next step now for us is to simply combine all of those resutls that we have and write down the full Bose-Hubbard Hamiltonian. here we have it:
[eqn]
The first term is the kinetic energy (derived last lecture). The second term is the interaction energy that we have just derived. The third term is the local potential energy, which is relevant if and only if the on-site energy depends on $i$. So, for instance, if you have a trap. But it can very often be neglected. And the last term is the chemical potential times total particle number which is only relevant in a grand canonical ensemble and I talk about this again a bit later.

When is this the valid Hamiltonian to describe our system? Firstly we need a reasonably deep lattice. We need to be in this tight binding limit, which basically just means that lattice depth needs to be at least $5E_r$, which is easy to achieve. The second one is we need to have not too strong interactions because remember, we made this approximation that we took out all of those terms which couple different bands. We were basically just looking at the biggest terms and the one is a good approximation if the scattering length $a$ is much smaller than the lattice constant (typically a couple of hundred nanometres), or equivalently I can also say that the interaction energy should be much, much smaller than the bandgap.

Basically what this means is that both requirements are typically fulfilled with ultracold atoms and therefore optical lattices are accurate implementations of the Bose-Hubbard model (and later on, the Fermi-Hubbard).

Now let's look at the ground states of this model. This was a Hubbard model and neglect the last term here.
I forget about that one that I would say that I have a fixed feeling. I also don't have to worry about this term.
What would be the queen status of this model? And very often quantum mechanics, you know, have two opposite terms.
You have the kinetic energy term ante interaction. And it's a term and you can ask yourself which term will dominate?
And well, if you go into different regimes, you will get different answers.
If you first start in the case where you are zero. an interaction energy is zero and T is positive.
this is not interacting limit. And there we already know what the quantitate will be to cross.
It would be a superfluid. It would be it was Einstein condensate. In this case, we only have kinetic energy.
if we have an abels ons, they will all go into the kuiken.
Zero Bloch wave. The lowest Bloch wave. we basically half the expression for the lowest Bloch wave to the end of an eighth power.
we put all atoms into the single particle Chron state. And the second quantise notation, the proc wave of go zero,
whereas the phase factors vectors can be just within as a discrete sum of all of the Wannier states.
This is if you want a discrete Fuyu transform from the Wannier states back into the waves.
we are now expressing the Bloch wave as the sum of all of the various states.
And we operate with this one to be an eighth power onto the vacuum state,
which basically means we take a particles and put each particle into the single particle quantity.
that state is then a delocalised state where every particles delocalised over the whole lattice.
And if you look at that state in various descriptions, you will find that the state is a super forward state.
It has long range Aurora off there and along which order because it is A, B, C state and its phase coherent,
which basically means that you think of the phase and on which phase order an image measured a fluke of phase of the way function to one.
And I can predict where it's it's everywhere else.
now we take all of those concepts from the phase transitions lecture long which order phase coherence off date and language.
And they all apply to this. Beezy. If we know two experiments, if we measure this B.S. in lattice, what do we get?
Well, if we measure in momentum space, we get a momentum distribution. It looks this.
We have the typical B.S. peak of zero momentum and we have the satellite peaks that we discussed in the last lecture,
plus two and minus two, $\hbar k$ in both the X as well in the Y direction and some higher order terms.
And that's a consequence because we now don't have condensation in plane waste, but condensation of longways.
If we were to look and we can do this with a microscope, quantum gas microscope locally and ask how many atoms to essy on each lattice site,
you will get something that will look very it is ordered because each particle, each atoms delocalised over the whole lattice.
Then they will do a measurement and a projector particle numbers down to a projector particle
down to individual lattice size because they measure how many particles I find here.
Each particle, which will be projected down into one, let the site arbitrarily.
And that means that it will have various different atom number two that can measure in different lattice sites just by Chip by chance.
Some will seem empty. Some moves him with one. Ednas two. It is three atoms we will see in a few slides.
It actually will follow a persona in distribution.
If I take the upper limit, if I take the limit of infinitely stronger parts of a direction, which basically means I take, you know, to be positive.
if a positive, repulsive energy and I take the kinetic energy to be zero teakwood zero, which means a very, very deep lattice.
Then we will be in a state and we'll call a modern insulating state. now if if you want to, like, minimise your Connecticut, your energy.
Only energy, you have to minimise the interaction and energy, which basically means you just have to go out of each other's way.
You should never put more than one particle on the lattice site. if I have in total as many particles as I have lattice sites.
I am filling one, then basically what I get is a state where I put exactly one particle into each lattice site and that's it.
the White House down. I take one particle, a dagger, and put it on and put one particle on site.
I operating with a dagger, operating in a vacuum, as usual, filling in.
And in this case, it's the filling factor.
If we have any good one you can forget about, it just means that you put a one particle in each lattice signed in Protocol four.
I means that you put Notah particles one insite one one. And so two, one and two and three wanted to add four and so on.
The state that you now get if you look at that state in weird space,
you would find exactly one particle and each lattice sent because that's what you did by Hot almost behind you.
Put them one in each lattice. And that's the state.
If you have this comment about filling us with qualities, you have as many particles as you have lattice sites.
That's the quantity that you will get. If you look at that state in momentum space, the calculator's next lecture.
But intuitively speaking, because each particle is more localised to an individual, that site very localist need space.
It must be very delocalised the momentum space because each particle now wheely
sits in one of those VNU orbitals and the position of all of the Bloch waves.
That basically means that all of the Bloch waves are equally occupied.
And you get a very private element and distribution, as I said, with calculators in detail in the next lecture.
the state we get now is and insulating standards an insulator because the particles are localised.
There's no conductance they cannot conduct. For instance, a particle currently cannot conduct energy.
The state is also incompressible. The superfoods state is very compressible because you can always put more items in.
This date is very incompressible. It's a capped state because if you no want to put another particle in here in this state,
it this particle will necessarily have to sit on top of an already existing particle.
that will have to pay this extra interaction energy you. And that means it's very expensive to put another particle.
India doesn't excitation gap. We'll see it in a minute.
And the state is different and compressible. And because all particles are now localised, we need each particle is localised to its own set site.
And there's no long Wenche phase coherence.
they matter where field and left hand site now has nothing to do with tomatoey fields on the hand site.
the picture for this state is viewed at each ethem as localised to a single site.
And this date can only exist for commentor at filling.
Which means if the number of atoms divided by the number of lattice sites is an integer one at depoliticise two Etna's politicised three,
four, five and so on. If you have, say, one point two atoms politicised,
then you will always have a few excess particles on top of this modern sitting background
and they are free to move around because they pay the same into action energy everywhere.
And then the whole state will turn into a superfluid. What I should at this point point out that so far we've only discussed we didn't limits.
We've only discussed limit were either we have known and interacting particles into which
energy zero or we are strictly localised particles where the kinetic energy is you.
And it worked. We will see in the next few slides a next lecture that actually these two states I.D. two phases,
mountains phase and superfluid phase Dennet only belet in these two limits.
They really connect all the way up to some point in the middle where we have a quantum phase transition from a superfluid into a modern insulator.
Well, I should also say there's a warning that the descriptions, equations, if you will, Don,
here saying, OK, this is the superfluid state and this is the modern silhouetting state.
These equations, these weigh functions, they are only embedded in these limits.
if I take a mild insulator and I put in some kinetic energy, the state fundamentally will we mean a mild insulator.
But the way function would be far more complicated than the simple way functionally will down here.
it is way function is only developed in the limit, and this way function is only valid in the non interacting limit.
And this date does not insulate the transition in the Boso Hubbard model was for
the first time observed in an experiment close to 20 years ago by Marcus Kayna.
Tim and Esslinger Eumundi the plot to tensioned others.
And that was really the starting point for this whole business of quantum simulators.
And this paper read did had the first observation of this is also the first paper that we look at in DeJohn Club on Foresty.
let's start to describe these states a bit more, quote, quantitatively and try to understand them a little bit more.
And let's start with this smart insulator in this peculiar limit will be a positive interaction, energy.
But the kinetic energy is zero. That limit is typically called the atomic limit to its limit.
Rattier zero. You as positive. you have a T. If you want this limit of you, what you going to infinity?
Because in this case, the full Hamiltonian that we have is just interaction, energy you over to some over I and items times and I'm minus one,
the interaction, energy and the chemical potential to our minus mbewe times.
And so now we should think a little bit more about what this term actually means.
And what is this new draught? Like I mentioned a couple of times, you in this case is the chemical potential.
we're thinking in the crank canonical ensemble and we're saying that new is the derivative of total energy.
With respect to particle number, we are Teagle zero, which makes life easy.
Otherwise you would have to say that this is under the condition of constant entropy.
you would have seen this term in the Firmament Statistical Physics lecture last year.
And as a reminder, it's telling you how much energy will the state gain if you add another particle?
the way you can think about this is you can think about this if you have a couple of subsystems.
And then there is like, say, more particles that you want to put into the subsystem.
You can ask each subsystem how much energy you would you need to take up in order to take up this extra particle.
And then the particle will go wherever it's the cheapest for it to go to, wherever the chemical potential of that subsystem is the lowest.
A slightly simplifies flies, a slightly simplified but rather good analogy is to say if I have a better
we have a certain voltage here and I put two leads into my system,
will the better we try electrons into the system or not? Well, if the voltage to chemical potential of the battery is higher than that of the system,
it will drive more particles in there until the chemical potential of my system is as big as the one off my bedroom.
this will be important later on when you want to this good party, good say over a trip or it can be very convenient to we now,
it's just a convenient parameter for us to see how the item number behaves in certain limits.
let's make a little truth table for this direction and ask what is the
intersection energy that we have for different particle numbers to table this year?
And you can always calculate it yourself.
If an eye is zero, zero times minus one, goes zeros into an energy zero, as you would expect, no particles, no interaction, energy.
If you have one particle, one minus zero gives zero to no interaction, energy for a single particle.
If you have two particles. Two minus two, minus one gets once we have two times one, you have to divide it by this one half year,
you get in total factor of two and then year to S.A.G. increases forever.
They have three particles. I have three point three times two.
in total, six divided by two gives me three. And it also is intuitive because I have three particles.
One, two, three. I have three pairs of particles that can interact.
I have three pairwise interactions. I paid three times the energy.
And then if you're four particles, four times three, it's twelve. Divided by two gives me six.
you can see how it into each energy increases.
What you can also see is that each step up from here to here is one from here to here as to from here to here is three.
two steps always get one bigger. now plot the expected average density for this Hamiltonian.
It only has the interaction energy in it as a function of the chemical potential.
you ask which particle? No n will minimise the total energy, including the chemical potential term.
And here's New York. This is PRODAN units of new over you. a chemical potentially in units of you.
Then you would see that for a negative chemical potential, the minimum is always at zero.
Because of every negative chemical potential, this term here is positive.
we just have to total and a total the total minimum of this term in order to get the minimum term.
If I have if I'm between zero and one so small and positive, I have a small negative term here.
if I end is bigger than zero, if I put a particle in there, this term becomes negative.
If this term, Mr. Zero, the whole thing wins. The minimum was there.
And I have one particle on each lattice signed and then its chemical potential going through you.
There's exactly at this step here I go from one to two and it's now cheaper, better for me to have two particles in the game in the system,
because then New Times two is bigger than the interaction term here and the total thing has its minimum to.
you can see that the average particle number will increase from zero to one.
It's chemical potential. Zero. We've stayed in that one until I reach chemical potential of one you.
And then it would jump up to energy to density to. And then it's you.
Because two to three and so on. if you think again about this point of how easily you can put in more particles.
Well, if my chemical potential is negative, I don't want to put particles anywhere. If my chemical potential becomes positive.
the better, he says, I want to put particles in the system. The system eagerly absorbs the first particle.
That's fine because the first particle doesn't cost any energy,
but it will not accept the second particle because then you would have to pay into action and you so
only have the chemical potential to change in total energy per particle number is bigger than you.
Then it makes sense to absorb the second particle Padian to each energy you and go to an equal to.
And then only if chemical potential goes to two. I can't step off to you going up from you to three, you and I increase my density again by one.
here's basically the same thing that I have said just now written down.
this plot of density is a function of chemical potential. Now consists of sharp steps.
Because where he was zero chup steps, that final temperature will be moved off and incompressible Patos in between.
incompressible, I mean, 20 compris ability is the derivative any new.
the change in density is a function of changing chemical potential.
And if I have a flat line here, that means my density does not change when I change my chemical potential.
That remains constant. That's the insulating incompressible A that you would expect.
if you're in a state with any equal one where the average ETA member is one and you have this type of Hamiltonian up here,
then you're in this modern sedating state. if you ask what's the probability of finding one particle on the lattice site?
That's exactly one. That's a trivial plot on this slide, but this year to contrast with the plot on the superfluid slide in a few minutes.
Another thing we can ask about this modern intellectual new atomic limit is we can ask about the excitations spectrum.
Will it have? Will it be Kepler's? it can have very cheap excitations? Or will it be capped?
Do we have to pay a certain amount of energy to create an excitation? If you think about the state, think of any good one.
You have exactly one atom at the site sitting here and now you want to do anything of that.
Say you want to change the state in any way.
Then you realise that the lowest energy version you can do as you take one particle at moving and all of its neighbour.
That's the smallest excitation you can do. And this excitation will cost the energy you, because now you suddenly have one that really occupied.
Let the sites see one thing in the air where you have two items on it at the site doubly occupied.
you pay next iteration and G.U.
what we say is that there's excitation creates one double occupancy, the double occupied let the site and a hole.
an empty lattice site. And people also sometimes call us a Doppler on hold on power.
Duplantis, O.W. Occupy that the site and the whole honesty empty at the site.
And because they are close to each other, it's a pair of that. the excitation spectrum is gapped.
The lowest excitation you can do is costing energy. You.
How do we describe these dates? How can we describe these dates and second quantise notation, that's actually rather simple.
We take the states and each lattice site and we can describe them as FOK states.
That's number states. we say to state, well, we have an Athans on a lattice site.
I'm just talking about the single lattice site again. I can write the Fox State N as the state where I with to vacuum.
And then just put n particles into the state. I operate with the creation of Paretta, a dagger to the power of N.
And then I have this quote. And factorial here to keep the phenomenalist.
And again, I do this mostly in order to have the comparison to the state we get for the superfluid state in the fusillades.
if I go on, I have my Fox date, the Fox dates are the existence of no operator.
Fox did end up number operating and operating on that. Just give it a number.
And that's what we implicitly used all the time. When you when we look at calculating the two energies.
And if I extra ventilation operator a on the state and then I get the state and minus one, which is clear, we have an in front.
You've seen this already and one B quantum mechanics. If I ask about dustups, Foxtail carry any phase information, so does this Fox.
Is this Fox then able to interfere of anything? And the answer is no.
The Fox states cannot interfere of anything because they carry no phase information whatsoever.
basically the expectation Wannier of PSI in such a fox did say as the field operator is zero.
Even though the expectation Wannier of size queered in the fox, it is non-zero.
For those of you that no phase to phase based representations, speaking of functions and so on,
the Fox state is a state that's a little ring around zero, so it has no preferred direction.
the expectation that you outsite this direction and this direction and this direction is zero.
But the expectation Wannier of Time Square, the distance from the origin that is non-zero because you're in the swing with a certain radius.
If not, that's not clear to you yet. Then don't very that will become more clear when you look at when we look at the next state on the next slide.
And now the mod insulator India atomic limit.
And again, I'm stressing in the atomic limit out of this, it will be more complicated, is just described by a product of local Foxton.
it I say product of all at the sites I be put and atoms on each set asite.
OK. After now having discussed, some properties of this strongly interacting limit Gatemouth,
limit the Fox dates and to insulate us, dear, we noticed cause a little more than not indirectly limit.
Look at the few properties of this one. Certainly not a can case.
The way function is already set is that each atom is in the same state.
If a macroscopic occupation of a single particle can state of the Bloch.
And if you now ask again about the local distribution of particle numbers,
you realise that each of the end particles has an equal chance to be found in any of the
lattice sites because the Bloch waves are separate out evenly over the whole system.
basically the chance of each particle to be found in each and every lattice site is the same.
Which then means that local ETA number follows a multinomial distribution. This is basically a generalisation of the binomial distribution.
if you would have an particle's, you would separate them out of a two lattice sites.
Then you would have a binomial distribution.
And that would predict you how likely it would give you the prediction of how likely it would be to find how many atoms on each of the lattice sites.
If you not have to, but many of them, it's sort of a binomial you can imagine normal distribution.
This one looks, of course, a bit more complicated.
But the same thing, the same thing applies to the binomial distribution that you have seen in the experimental methods course already in one bean.
That's the point that this can be simplified to a product of precise distributions on each lattice site.
Suki speaking. That's true in a Crenn canonical Osogbo, where a total at a number does not need to be conserved.
But it's not so matter. It's not so important at this stage.
What's important is that we really expect a distribution that looks this.
Now it's a persona in distribution on each lattice site.
if you have an average at a number of one, it, you know, superfluid state, you have a high probability of finding one atom.
But you have equally high probability of finding zero atoms on another site.
And that's compensated for by a smaller probability of finding two, three, four or even more atoms on this lattice site.
we get this local atom number fluctuations, everybody I've seen on the introduction slide.
The next thing is that it's obvious that not working case, the system must have kept this expectation.
it cannot be kept. But it must be kept less, because the reason is that each particle, it sits in a single particle crown state.
But the single particle, Crozet, has a continuous dispersion relation. Epson of Q this minus Corzo dispersion.
We have 90 lattice. basically it can take any of the particles indices and create an excitation.
We're just creating an excitation weaksite. This particle was modified to a small fine momentum because it is personal relation.
It continues disfigures Kepler's. And for the experts that have done the AOP, the AQ GOP lecture Rozario on last term.
If I take weakend directions, the form of this dispersed relation changes.
It goes into the bubble. You are forming its thoughts of linear. But the excitations nonetheless remain gutless.
These excitations, I can then think of collective exhortations density waves of Honan's, but still they are gutless.
Okay. The other thing how I can describe his persona distribution's how I can describe this would you know me?
The distribution is to realise that the Muji normal distribution will affect the rise into local coherence states Cohu in states UFS Unity,
A.P. lecture. And they're basically given by a super position of the Fox states and.
Mandela characterised by an complex number Orfa, so the cohu coherent state with coming summer offers given by each of the miners.
I offer absolute various quite a to as a prefecture. And then the sum of all fox dates.
And you could see to infinity of IFR to the end. Normalised in this way.
Times the Fox state and. it is Cohu and states have been introduced as the Igen states of DNA relation operator,
which basically means if I take your nation on the state of war, I just get four times over.
they just like. Reproduce themselves under the annihilation operator.
And these dates are very crucial in persons' quantum optics because they are the state's.
Were large amplitude over that correspond to Cohu and classical Lightfields amplitude,
often absent Wannier Phifer and the phase phy, which is the argument of over.
this complex number of unknowingly really encode something that classically
corresponds to the MP Tudeh of a classical field and the phase of a classical field.
they are the crucial states that make the connexions between quantised Lightfields, for instance, and classical electrical fuse.
We would say have a well-defined phase and they are also crucial for us.
If you think of metal with optics, if you think of the pieces because they are Notah states that locally have a phase.
If you calculate their number distribution, that's something that's easy to calculate.
You ask, what's the probability of finding any particles in such a coherent state?
And these are all calculations that you've done last year.
You'll realise it's the overlap into equal between the equivalent state over and the Fox state, an absolute make a.
And you basically get the debt. Turns out to be a persona distribution where the average particle number really
expected particle number for a state alpha is just given by absolute Wannier.
Foskett amplitude does the intensity if you want.
Important point for us now is that you can now calculate the expectation Wannier in the clearance date of the insulation operator,
BPCI, the field operator. That one is non-zero. As we said already, up here in the discrete version, it's not zero.
And that means at launch pure B.S. at Duigan zero,
which can be described as a product of this local human states with a constant phase to phase is the same
everywhere because of long range order really shows up that these up these correlate upsite deg upsite J.
In this species, date is not zero and it becomes independent of IFJ because the phases are not a position, it's not position dependent.
we really have off there along language order. what this means is that, as I said before, the superfluid state is a ordered state.
It's a state with approximately this phasey queer freedoms problem.
We have one spontaneously chosen phase that we will see and hear.
now we can have a better understanding of the two limits, the non into acting limit and the atomic limit, and we can now ask.
Can you also say something about the about the whole phase diagram in between?
And the answer is yes, we can, because we can start by saying that the superfluid has a broken symmetry.
We just discussed it. It has this order, pragmatism of their language or outlaw.
Wait a month. And today that does not have a broken symmetry,
which means that these two limits have been this must be separated by a quantum a phase position at some critical point.
You a C critical eulogy. It cannot be a cross over.
Because we go from a phase that has no problem symmetry into something, it has broken symmetry.
there must be a phase transition in between. And Jay, here is what was t a few slides ago.
As I said before, T and J are we can the same thing for us. We will use them in the same manner and go back and forth between them.
let's make a few plots. Let's make us catch the first catch I want to make is the X axis is always U of a J.
it's the way to between interaction, energy, you add to kinetic energy J.
Or what was t a few slides ago. And we know that we have these two limits.
You were J being very large. That's the atomic limit. We have to limit of you being zero.
you j being zero. That means that this is the non interacting limit.
And we now say that somewhere in between there will be this critical you for J
where we have a phase position from the superfluid into the mud until later.
And the first thing I can plot is the excitation energy. I can say, what is the size of the gap?
The lowest excitation energy. If the system is gaffed, then for a large U of a J.
Over here I would have an interaction. Energy on your order. If you. And this extra energy, there's this gap.
We clear create this gap with decay down to zero antiquity. Good point.
use to find it here. But lowest excitation that we can do.
Become Karplus. It must become gas. That's because we have discussed before that the superfluid is Kepner's.
all of a year to get to zero. the lowest excitation energy must be zero.
But here, if we go into the modern insulator and this resume, then it can become finite and it would go up this.
And for very large you of a J, we just caillat the interactions care you. we have to interactions, can you over here and in here,
it must change in a more complicated manner because it must vanish over here where we have to get this superfluid.
All of this we can just say from thinking about what we know about from these
limits and from the point that there must be a phase submission in between. The other thing we can plot is not as auto perimeter.
We can plot the limit of iron. I'm A.J. going to infinity off this coveted upsite.
I dig upsite, Jane. And we know that in the unordered phase, in the mountain set, it is with zero.
And then it would come up here. In the superfluid site, again, we know that the other parameter must be zero, but this financial year.
We know that this would be a continuous phase transition. basically, it works to zero at this point.
And this is now what we call a quantum phase transition, which is driven by quantum fluctuations and not from the fluctuations.
To talk about this later. It just means for us now that it happens in the ground state.
It's TEAC with your. And how does this look and experiment?
Well, that's mostly something that you would see in the journal club this weak where we can talk about this also in more detail.
But here is that the main plot of what they got. This is to BEC. In the absence of the lattice Desierto of life pictures, you see the typical VCP.
And then if you increased lattice that if you load this into a lattice, you see the satellite pics coming up.
And we talked about last time about that the satellite peaks become stronger for a deeper
lattices simply because the plock wave now has more mixtures of the higher order plane weighs.
But then here, between you and gee, something funny happens because we see it now, the character of the stage really changes a lot.
We see it see that these sharp peaks really fully go away. And we seem to have a very incoherent state.
And that's the phase transition from the superfluid into the modern insulator with a phase.
Coherence is lost. Yes. No phase coherence in the system anymore. The phase is not long winch ordered anymore.
And everything is happening just on the local scale. And then in a very deep let us where we deep in the mud insulator, we will have a much insulated,
as we describe mostly by particle sitting on thing and let the sites.
this is just the food transform of any Wannier functions that you will get here.
And we discussed these pictures in Maldito Next lecture.
we observe a reversible phase transition, so we observe to be can go into a deep lattice from here to here, goes away and comes back.
We discussed this more and let us in the journal club. And it will have made a specific let us test the reasons we did.
The reasons are given here. The reason is that for larger vnu deeper.
Let us seise the interaction as you increase as moderately. Not too important.
But the tunnelling t decreases almost exponentially. Remember the plot to be signed last lecture.
that basically means that you of a t when you have a J.
If I want to be back it it decreases almost exponentially with increasing lattice stepped.
And that means that in the deep lattice I expect to Martin's lattice,
one of the weaker lattice I expect the superfluid from by changing lattice step that can go from the one case to the other case.
And the transition that you can see here is really smoothed out.
It's not as sharp as he would have thought. Maybe from the simpler calculations, because you're not in the big homogeneous system,
you're in homogeneous system due to the trap that we were discussing.
Also more in a few lectures. And the last picture for today is basically how we just a phase diagram look,
