Last time we talked about, what the last couple of weaks we talked about, interesting phases you can have - superfluid, mott insulators and then last time about quantum magnetism phases. Now today is again a very big change because today we're talking about how a system can actually reach thermal equilibrium, something we've always been taken for granted. We've always been saying, Okay, you put it gas in there and it will have a temperature of so-and-so. And it would be described by a thermal state. And we swept under the rug, how can it get there and can it actually even thermalise? And what does thermalisation actually really mean? that's going to be the topic of today. It's a connection really to statistical mechanics and thermodynamics. How does thermodynamics actually work here? And so what is thermalisation? Well, if you start with thermodynamics, you say it's just an empirical fact, it's an observation that if I take a generic classical manybody system, it will, if left alone, evolve into a thermal state. The two classical examples would be to say, if I have a system where all of the particles are at rest, amd just inject some energy in the form of one very fast, big coming from the right, then obviously, before it starts colliding, it's a very non-thermal state. It's one particle being really fast enough to pass the other particles being at rest. That's a pretty non-equilibrium situation. But then you know that if you calculate now the conditions or you just observe what happens after many, many collisions, you can describe the evolution. You can describe the distribution of velocities that you get very, very well with an ideal gas law. It looks really just like a thermal state. Another example from thermodynamics is the Joule expansion. You start with a gas on one side of a container, with this one being close to the pressure of being the volume here and obviously the density on the other site is empty.
[pic]x2
There's a vacuum, there's nothing there. Now you know that if you now open up this connection and the gas will expand, that will fill the full volume and you would have a different kind of pressure everywhere and the different temperature. And you also know from thermodynamics that this process is irreversible. You cannot just say, particle, so please go back and close the gate again. And if you go from here to here, this irreversible possibility is seen by an increase in entropy, some quantity calculated in classical thermodynamics. The idea is that this process of thermalisation is something that happens and it's irreversible. If you open up the gate, you have a very non equilibrium situation, and particles which flow from here to here. And by doing so in this very violent non-adiabatic, non quasi static fashion, it will create entropy, which means if you come in with a piston and push the particles back or back to the other site and close to five again, you will find out that you have a higher temperature near the end and the higher pressure than you had before, because you've created entropy, you've created disorder in the system. And once it's in there, it can't get out. That's the second law of thermodynamics. This is nothing new.


The new part is a question of, OK, how does this happen microscopically? How can a system go from a state with a low entropy to a state of a higher and what's going on there? And the answer the people now believe is the answer is the answer of dynamical chaos. I should maybe stress one important point here. Everything we're doing now is you always talking now about isolated systems, so we're talking about a system has no firm connections to the outside world. Because what you normally do is when you, for instance, take a system, you say, I take my little rope and I put it in the cryostat then which you say, well, it's in thermal contact with a big reservoir and then by exchanging energy and information, will become entangled with the reservoir. It will equally point at the same temperature anywhere. Normally you never really much think about the process of thermalisation itself, because you just say my system is in contact with a big thermal reservoir and it gets the temperature from there. And it's very nice in many situations, but it's a very interesting question, what happens in isolation? And the question is, of course, also very relevant for cosmologists, because you would argue that, well, if I start, if I think of the Big Bang at the start of the universe coming from nothing out of the Big Bang, it has to equilibrium as a closed, isolated quantum system in a sense because there is nothing outside. How can such a system happen? And it turns out the answer is dynamical chaos, where the present determines the future, but the approximate present does not approximately determine the future. That's a weird sentence that it's past us step by step.


The first thing is to say, well, this is classical physics, classical dynamics.
Newton's laws apply. if I know my initial state, it's just mechanics.
I can calculate what would be the state at any time later on the property.
The problem is only that I know don't know my initial state perfectly well. And you kind of know if you have an opinion on the dynamics,
if you say I was over a ball rolling down the slope and have a one percent uncertainty in the initial velocity,
I get something in the order of one percent uncertainty in the final position. Fine.
That's approximately where I am here will know approximately where it end up.
But the question is, can I have a system where if I just know the present, approximately I cannot say anything, even approximately about the future.
And this is, of course, something that people in popular culture at say a lot.
It was done the butterfly effect where if I have the atmospheric conditions,
the question of whether I get a tropical storm over North America or maybe over Asia
somewhere can depend on whether a butterfly and presitent was flapping its wings or not.
It's kind of a little bit with the we had a related idea when we were talking about the spontaneous symmetry breaking when we were saying,
you put a pencil on the tip, it will fall over some direction and it can be extremely hard and impossible
to predict which direction because it can go down different routes and very,
very small. Initial things can like, make the decision. You have something many body contacts, which is a bit similar but also different,
where you would say that the dynamics that you get are exponentially diverging, depending on the initial conditions.
a typical example where you get this is the easiest one is the double pendulum.
So, you know, if I have a single pendulum just swinging back and forth,
it's my simple harmonic motion and I can predict everything approximately and perfectly well.
If I have a double pendulum swing back to the end of the first part of the second pendulum attached.
You just watch the trajectories that go out here.
You would see that a very different, very similar path of the trajectory at this point might end up going into very different futures later on.
you see, OK, well, APR is always just doing this kind of isolation, but now suddenly diverges.
the first oscillation looks kind of a third or fourth oscillation,
but if the fourth one suddenly things turn out differently and it just spins around the lower one and so on.
Another typical example the people have studied, the most of it initially is what they call the so-called Lawrence Attractor.
It's a simple differential equation with just a cubic term. And the idea that you get in some parameter space, it's the following.
you see the particles just moving around in this kind of orbit here or acquisition of the different equations moving around in his orbit.
You see that it starts spiralling around this one point here.
And then at some case, for some reasons, we will go over and spiral towards a different point.
And then for some reason, we go back and spout about this point again.
it's extremely hard to predict what in the next orbit it will stay on this site of it to go over to the other site because it will really very,
very much depends on where you are you in this land that night. a very small difference.
It's a fork in the road. You go this way, you go that way. And that's something that people call, uh, uh, say.
What people say is that the uncertainty in the forecast increases exponentially with the elapsed time.
if I have this differentiated question, I'm here, I can say, yes, you most likely end up there, dear, dear, dear, dear.
But Ray, will you be after two rotations? You can't say anything, really, because the uncertainty grows exponentially.
And the way it grows is we've been surprised at the exponent, the financial dynamics this quarter, the of exponent.
And you will see a lot of literature where people look at different systems and say they try to extract the kind of exponent,
and if it's finite, you have chaotic dynamics. If it's zero, you have regular dynamics.
And this is the way people now believe that a simple classical system can formalise,
because if I cannot really later on say what a particle will be if we limit uncertainty grows exponentially,
then I kind of lose the information about the initial state. What if I say, okay, the particle particles snow here, here you cannot really say,
where was it 100 orbits before you can really say it wasn't in this area?
Wasn't this light? Was the initial state of particles here all the particles there,
if you think big of this jewel expansion after you have this comet state and the two chambers were identical,
you cannot say what a particle initially you are left or on the way, such as information about initial state is erased.
It's gone. It's not practically accessible anymore.
And that's what people mean, got big time dynamics to redirect, sweep out the whole parameter space.
And after some point in time, the system can be anywhere in parameter space.
Well, I should be a bit more precise. Of course, you have tons of quantities, the one quantity, this is an isolated quantum system.
Again, it's important to isolate is always conserve this energy.
And now we are suddenly doing thermodynamics because we're not suddenly saying that, OK, well.
The only thing that's conserved over time is energy and everything else because of this exotic time dynamics gets erased.
Then if I want to make a prediction of how what can I say about the state? Far in the future.
What I can say that a very good approximation is what we call the microeconomic an ensemble being a particle
is of equal probability at any point in space based where it has to save energy than an initial stage.
everything was erased, except for the initial for for the energy.
And that's what we mean, the feminisation. And that's how we get the microcontroller sample and then, you know,
from statistical physics how you can go on to further and further from canonical crank, canonical and so on.
I think this is the key step of saying where you go from microscopic loss, you have dynamical chaos.
You go to Harvard economics into thermodynamics. This is the key step printing if you want microscopic to statistical physics to thermodynamics.
OK. And this is well understood, and it's it's a fascinating story, but it's kind of it's there.
And as I said before, Feminisation reasons a lot of information about the initial state,
except for a few conserved quantities a particle, no energy to the momentum of the system.
In some cases here, of course not quite because it's. A moment of concern, but in general, often it is OK.
The key point. For having something this is you always need to have a non-linear differential equation,
if you are differential equations linear, you can't have that.
Because in the linear equation, you know, you have to superposition of solutions, which means you can always say,
well, if I'm over here or there on initial stage, it must be over the on the final stage.
I can't have this exponential growth of uncertainty. I can only have that you have an engineer within the system.
And it's also well understood from classical dynamics, classical dynamical chaos.
And now that's OK, and just to say that also in classical cases, you don't always get it, you get it, in some cases put on in all cases.
the jury system is a typical system where you would expect chaotic dynamics and feminisation and you would expect to have the ideal gas.
Now in one day, if you want this system situation can be different if you have so many particles in
the road that they can really only move in one direction and they are all identical.
Then you realise that you have many, many more kinds of quantities,
because the only way how you can exchange was what can happen in a collision between
two identical particles is that they exchange their momentum but not redistributed.
if one particle is very slow, one part goes very fast. Afterwards, the other particle will be very fast and the first one will be very slow,
but it will not be the case that they cannot have equal velocities afterwards.
Right, that's impossible.
And that's what you get with Newton Cradle here, we really get all of the energy will always be in one bite at the time.
it's strictly speaking, if there would not be friction or anything. A perfectly periodic dynamic would not firmness.
And this is what people call integral dynamics.
Integral just really means that you can integrate the differential equation if you get like, say, maybe an analytic solution for what it looks like,
its regular dynamics look chaotic but regular, and it's called integral and there's no firm reservation in you.
And what people are saying, which you can mathematically prove is you can show that these systems are integral
because they have a high number of indicators of motion sort of conserved quantities.
you can show that the occupation of two different momentum classes,
how many projects are moving with a given velocity and how many particles are west, that one doing a collision is not changing.
it's an integral of motion. It's something that stays constant.
And then, you know, from when you started first doing Kepler's laws, you know how you could solve them by saying,
Well, OK, I have this three degrees of freedom, but I have my three conserved quantities and different.
I can integrate it up. And I just got a regular dynamics because it's the only dynamics compatible with those conserved quantities.
If you don't have as many conserved quantities, you have degrees of freedom, which you tend to have in this kind of system,
then this and that mix is constrained so much as can't formalised and that's how you get classical integral motion.
And it's a typical thing that you have in one day and almost never higher up in higher dimensions.
But if you do, particles are kind of colliding colliding in two dimensions.
The picture is that what if they really hard on it's a collision, they just exchange their momentum.
But if ever glancing incidents, then they cannot go off in this direction.
So, for instance, say the same velocities or whatnot, so you can redistribute the absolute amount of momentum between particles.
OK. And now we finally go over to quantum and ask, can we do the same kind of understanding for quantum systems?
What's happening with a quantum system? Can the quantum system formulas?
And again, I'm stressing that we are talking about isolated systems where there's no exchange, you have an environment.
There is no external noise. There's no heat exchange and classical human dynamic terms.
You can still do work on the system, so you could still say a quantum system, so it could be in a and it can compress the piston.
But there should not be any thermal exchange between the particles into one.
Which means in our case, of course, we can make our traps stronger or weaker change, let us step and things this,
but there's no heat exchange because we just interacting with a classical field that has no entropy.
OK, so. Well, you can do this analysis in one line, and you can say feminisation is impossible because the shooting equation is a linear equation.
dynamical chaos cannot take place because it's a linear differential equation.
we should go home. There is no feminisation of quantum mechanics. The problem is, of course, that this can't be the full story, because in the end,
even the stuff that we describe as classical, it's just an approximation. Everything is quantum in the end.
And we do see formalisation. what's going on? And the answer is we have to think hard about what we actually mean with feminisation and
whether we should really think about whether or a picture of humanisation is the one.
let's start looking into this. let's say I start from a pure state of zero, it's time to equals zero.
And I do unitary time evolution. It's a closed system.
it's just Hamiltonian time evolutionary and you know, it's the matrix exponential of them in Italy.
To your times, the nation state gives you the final state.
the key thing is to say, well, this state safety, it will remain a pure state away from, I get away from.
I have many, many, many, many kinds of quantities in here, because if you think of the way function for many wave from, you can always.
This is what position of one of the many agencies. What conceptual you can do this?
We looked at in practise and we said the dimension of the Hubert's space is so huge it's impossible to do it in practise.
But conceptually, of course, you can read everything in an eigenvectors.
You do that and then you know that the projection of the item onto the 18 states,
the occupations of the island states will not change in time because the island states.
you know that if you have dimensionality of human space and you will have encountered quantity,
then all of those projectors, so you have exponentially many conserved quantities and you manage better than them.
it's a huge number. in classical sense, you would say, OK,
now have a system of sorts source of so many conserved quantities that are conceptualisation because
the occupation of each state literally stays constant over time because the American states.
basically. And isolate the quantum system can therefore never dated.
You cannot say there is any kind of closed system dynamics where you start of
a pure state of time to zero and it goes into a thermal density matrix.
And I'm assuming everybody's familiar with the language of density matrices and firmer density matrices.
I see people nodding, that's good. So, so that can't happen on a global scale.
The cost of shooting a question is that you? Now, the key insight in the toy model, if you want, is to say, OK, this is about the global system.
What can happen to subsystems? And let's look at the toy model that say we just thought of a pure state of two spins spin it left to spin it a right.
Let me start with an entangled state up, down plus down up.
Do you have the position of the one speed being up, the ever being down plus the opposite one?
this is the office of your state is a purely functional.
But even now, just looking at the state on the left hand, on the left hand system, so I take the partial trace of the system on the hand site.
The remaining density makes for the left hand system looks a mixed state half half.
And if you don't know what the past which raises, they're sitting down here, which you can see,
but which is in the notes where you can find a web page, which explains it very nicely.
the idea is to say, OK, intuitively speaking, I have this bipartite system, just not left system on the right.
And I know that these two subsystems are entangled and it's global in a pure state event, they'll say, Well, let's forget about the system.
On the left hand site, let's put it somewhere I never look at again, and let's just look focus on the one spin state and the one thing.
And let me do local measurements on this one to a certain what is going to be the state.
What I then find is that, well, half the time I see you spin up half the time as he has been done,
so with a certain there is nothing I can say that looks a mixed state. I can also do all kind of fancy spin rotations on it.
Try to measure a different basis. There will always be half this, half that will obviously mix episodes.
it looks a mixed state.
And if I wouldn't know that it's entangled with the other half of the system, I wouldn't know that it's global or state.
I would have thought it could be global, it could be just on its own in a mixed state.
it's not it's an important conceptual step.
If the system is entangled with something else and I don't have access to the other site, I can never fundamentally never prove that it's entangled.
It can always look just a mixed state on the one off. Because I just don't have access to the information.
But that's kind of an important insight for us, because maybe subsystems. Ten families.
maybe if I have a big plug of system of a million particles and whenever I only measure
the left half of the half or the middle half or whatever sub selectron of particles,
they might look a firmer state.
maybe the system globally doesn't formalise, but each part locally looks it has formalised and then all of the pureness, if you want,
is in this many body entanglement between all of the parts of the system,
which I can never really measure because you can measure a million auto correlation function.
If you have a million particles.
And that's the spirit that stayed here, and we're going to look at this idea in the next couple of slides and a bit more detail.
Just to say what is what is this sudden crunch,
because this is a typical protocol that people look at this, the word quenching comes from material signs.
And it means the rapid cooling of a rock piece and water. you take your hot iron, for instance,
and put it into a cold oil liquid water so you very quickly change the temperature in
this case and thereby you get a very interesting non-equilibrium properties.
crunch for us just means a sudden crunch is changing in between instantly.
Like opening up this thing in an instant. That's a sudden quick.
And when you have a sudden crunch, when you do something that's very non-diabetic,
not causes static, not a slow, smooth change, but a sudden bang, different Hamiltonian,
then you have non-equilibrium dynamics because the system initially is very far out of
equilibrium and then the system reaching equilibrium again in the classical description.
That's irreversible, and that's where entropy can increase.
sudden crunch just means we suddenly project onto a new Hamiltonian and then we know that classically speaking,
you can have irreversible dynamics that produces entropy.
And then we can look at what else this kind of is a set up to talk about depression as a it's a nice test that people are studying a lot.
We can see what does this do on the quantum site? OK, so let's try to do some calculations here.
We start off with an island state size zero, which could be the iron state of the Hamiltonian h0.
we started in the concept of Hamiltonian because that's a nice, pure state that we can create approximately created in a lab.
And then let's say a time check with zero, which suddenly changed Hamiltonian to eight one.
one example, if you can think of, which is a good example, is to say, well, OK,
let me have a paramagnetic let me have the magnetic field pointing in that direction.
all of the spins are pointing no more or less than this, that that requires a pure state.
And now what I can do is I can suddenly instantly switch the direction off to make it feel to be in the.
You know that if you would do it slowly, if you would slowly rotating magnetic field,
the pure spins, it would just rotate rivet it and that would be it.
But now suddenly, if you have two spins pointing in this direction, suddenly in this direction.
They will not turn this white, if you look at the classical mechanics,
they will start the process around this magnetic field that will start to process
and they will collide why they're doing that and they will permit that in a way.
And then I have a lot of energy because they are not in the iron state of the system, but because they are now perpendicular to it.
They have a lot of energy and that energy has to stay in the system. Like a typical crunch we could do in items is to say we just suddenly jump,
let us go for a weak from a weak, let us into a very strong leaders or vice versa.
Well, any questions this? what we do to analyse this is take this initial state and we express it again, conceptually,
you can't really do this in practise often in the island state basis of each one.
you write this one as a position of all of the island states of the new Hamiltonian, and these are states.
I would have epsilon. You write it just as a squat position of efficiency, I.
Conceptually easy. And then you say, OK, well, how does this, by the way, function or evolve in time?
Pantheons, who is conceptually, again, very easy because these states saying I can state.
they just acquire Facebook to each buy abstinent items to your bar,
which basically means you can say the only thing that happens is that these kind of coefficients are evolving in time.
They should basically say that this one in the next couple of slides is really following one major paper from 2008.
It's one of the few theory papers that made it into nature because it's really such a great insight.
And if you want to read up on this, you can just read up on this paper, which explains things, and it's quite a good thing to.
we know that this state, because it's obviously going to be a pure state, remains pure, so it can't allies globally.
But let's not focus on the way, frankly, that's what was in the stuff we can actually measure.
We can't measure every function, what we can measure observable. here's our time in a function that we just arrived in the previous light.
Nothing too fancy about it. And let's say let's look at the prediction for an observable eight could be the density could be the momentum.
Density could be the spin, the magnetisation any observable. And then we know that the expectation value of this obstacle.
what you get after averaging over many, many measurements you can write down this,
it's the the sandwich bit with the time of all state left and to the right.
The expectation that, you know, you just plug in those things and you get this expression here, right?
this is say this one gives me the sum of AJ. I get to see Jay here and getting you to the minus observed on Jay here.
And then this one is complex. Conjugate it. Let's say this is the sum of our eyes.
We're going to see a complex conjugated here in a minus sign the energy.
And here the end, I call this these matrix elements AIG. these are obviously expectations of these types AIG.
Just the former thing I can write, don't this.
And this turns out to be useful because what I can now define is I cannot define what is the long term average,
but I'm not interested in the observable at a certain point in time,
but I'm interested in the long term average of this observable average of all possible times.
We'll see in a minute why this is useful, but if I do this, what you realise is that this one simplifies massively because all of these terms.
You have this rotating and you to the minus i epsilon j at minus absurd eight times T. It's kind of rotating on the complex on circle.
If you take the time average of disputation, you get exactly zero right,
which basically means that all of those rotating terms the average down to zero. The only terms that remain out of the original terms were I equals j,
because an after an A-minus epsilon, I so zero, so I don't get the first rotation.
in those terms we made, which basically means that now I can write this long term average just in a diagonal
way as I do diagonal terms times to call efficiency if I just quit some of my.
the time is now we're going back to a simpler time because the oscillating terms all have oscillated away.
why should I do this, why should I care about this long term average?
Well, the answer is that if we assume we have a system that reaches a steady state that equilibrate or maybe even formalises,
let's just assume that then what we know is that if the system formalises, a of team has to reach a steady state.
you would expect that if I have a system that initially does something on equilibrium but eventually settles down into a firm and state,
then my observable will do something crazy. But it will settle down into a firm, into a into a steady state.
Once you have a firm, a state, no, then makes nothing is happening anymore. If the state is steady, doesn't change anymore, right?
what this means is that if I want to ask what is going to happen in four long times when the system has formalised well,
the average voter did a get over here.
And because this goes on for infinitely long, I can neglect this party in the beginning with us, and that mix is just exactly this long term average.
if I assume that the system is firm and I think it's reaching a steady state,
then it can predict that steady state just using this diagonal form, not the whole phone.
the interpretation is that if the system, which is a city state where it is necessary,
must be a constant, then the consent value I get must be identical to the long term average.
And that's simply facile thinking a lot, and it actually turns out to be a very interesting and very complex insight as we into slides.
people call this the diagonal ensemble. Which is basically saying that if I take a steady state, this must be true for all of them.
if the system really goes into a formal, steady state, all of the efforts that I want to predict,
everything I can predict about what I can measure on the system would only depend on this diagonal ensemble.
if I think of my density matrix of time T equals zero, which you can calculate even for a pure statewide.
Capsule items site looks then if I wanted to calculate anything, it happens in the steady state.
I can forget about all of the octagon elements I just use to diagonal elements. And that's what people call it, diagonal also on the.
Just saying take the take the density matrix of time to zero after the crunch.
You don't even have to calculate anytime evolution, you just know it,
you can just throw away all of the off the air element and just keep to the elements,
and that will predict the steady state if there is a steady state.
And intuitive interpretations, really, as this as the off diagonal terms with oscillate fast in a chaotic fashion.
Hence, after some time, they effectively vanish, so they're irrelevant for calculating of the.
Four time average for. all of this is, of course, not really relying on the fact that if I do reach a steady state,
if you think of you Newton's cradle, you got a time periodic thing, tick tock, tick tock,
then this would never happen because what you would have done in this case where you have this
regular dynamics is that everything has one fundamental frequency and harmonics thereof,
which basically means that all of those different parts, you will not have independent frequencies, so they will not all interfere to zero on average.
Kind of all, stay in unison and you have this periodic structure and then you have to something that does not paralyse.
OK. now we said the only thing that we said is that there's a big simplification because you if you do families,
you can like, you should be able to predict everything using the signals of the.
now what they did in this paper is they said, OK, let's look at some numerical example.
Let's try to calculate this. And I said if that did, of course, calculating stuff for a big many buddy system dynamics is totally unfeasible.
And definitely had to get take the small, the biggest system they could do and hope that it's still a small system,
but it's still predicting something useful. here's the system they took.
It took something this, Julie, to respond to an experiment. They took a little bit of a two dimensional lattice in here.
And the bigger part of the mission that is up here and initially there was no hopping between and there were two isolated systems.
And then they said we put five hot on on this site and we calculate the quantity of these sites.
Hardcore bosons are numerically reasonably easy to do if they're interacting. But because you say you is infinitely large, it's the hard core.
If they don't start of two particles in the same that the site, you will never get two particles on the same site.
you only have to like, look at zero and one is occupation numbers per litre site.
you hubert's basis is quite a bit smaller than if you would have one two three four five on the same site.
that makes life simpler for them.
OK, so what they didn't say is they wish they stayed here and then the time stick with zero, they switch on the hopping from here to here.
the system will not expand into the food system. And if the system is firm and I think you would expect that it goes into a firm and
state at a finite temperature because it's now there was a crunch entropy was created.
It's not the quantity anymore. that's what you would expect. But the question is, will the system go into a thermal state or not?
What were the. And, well, they looked at some of the let's, for instance, say as a function of time.
this is a time in units of the hopping hopping, as you called. That's why T.J. and they said, OK, let's look at, for instance,
the momentum distribution and ask how many particles do we have with zero momentum in the.
It's an observer. It's one thing you can look at and then you see the blue line is the dynamics, the calculation.
It starts off here. It does some oscillations, but then it does settle down into a steady state.
There are still oscillations about the steady status fluctuations on top of that.
That's because, well, we have five particles does not have the limit.
You would expect to find that those corrections that you would have fluctuations around.
And then you can say, okay, well, we know by theory that the value that we should get should be given by the diagonal ensemble.
the prediction after the Agnus homebuilders, the red line here is this line.
Fits perfectly, as it should would have been very surprised. The pricing otherwise.
And then they can also say, well, I can also go in and calculate after the crash what is my energy in the state that I have,
what is the total energy that I have?
You can calculate it and then you can say, Well, if I now would put in a Michael Panopto sample at the same time at the same energy,
what would be the prediction of this microcontroller ensemble? And it turns out that's the Green Line perfectly ellipse on top of the red light.
And they also look at the canonical ensemble, which gives a slightly different answer. You can talk about this in a minute.
OK, but this is one of the other white is only and of X equals zero.
they can also say, let's look at long times when stuff has relaxed and plot the food momentum distribution.
he has X and he has an X. It's got the full momentum distribution on the X direction.
The black line,
this is the initial state because the Vatican said it was very peaked around zero and we can see now the final distributions we get it is broader.
it's not the crown state anymore makes sense.
Next thing you see is that if I think about this diagonal ensemble, Hollywood exceptional mix, I've convinced myself now that they must be identical.
We also knew this in fury. I get like, This is the red line and I can again look at the Green Line to micro-economic a prediction.
And again, they're perfectly on top of each other. we're seeing two things we're seeing a after a long time I can predict.
What I can describe, what I get in this kind of dynamics with the microkernel model.
it looks the momentum distribution. When I look at the momentum of each individual particle that seems to formalise,
even though I know the whole way function confirm Elisabeth Moss debut.
And the second thing I can see is that this microeconomic prediction with to the accurate predicted.
And this is what we are now going to call Feminisation.
We're not going to say that, OK, the wave function goes really into affirmative density matrix because it can't it must step away function.
But if it looks whatever I measure, it looks, I get the same response and in informal system,
then I will just call this feminisation because that's practically what we do, what we wanted to predict, what we can measure.
And if the system responds a formal system does, we think it's a formal system?
OK. And the differences between a micro canonical, the canonical and so on, but here you can ignore that just because the system is so small.
you've seen in family dynamics that if you go to the infinite systems has limit,
you get the equivalence of assault and the prediction of mycophenolate non-canonical become the same.
But that's only true in the family dynamic limit. the fact that it's not through here is totally fine just stems from the final size of the system.
OK. Now. Big step, saying, OK, this was an observation we could see that this was happening.
The system is apparently the system is apparently formalising,
and after some time we can see the diagnosis predicts the same thing as the marketing of.
And then you can go in very deeply and you can ask, why is that what is the fundamental reason for why, which is why it should be this?
And then you can think of, OK, there might be I mean, I might have fancy,
I might have a very complicated structure with many Asian states being occupied and maybe there's some selectron.
Would it be occupied in exactly such a way that the different contributions add up to give me the answer?
But then you think of it further and say, well, that's pretty, that's pretty weird, because if I start to throw it,
I can bite down very different initial states that all have the same energy and they will have different occupations of the different island states.
What they would have a different occupation of the different states, but they all kind of must verbalise to the same state.
that's pretty, pretty weird. How could that be?
It can't really be in the structure of these coefficients because I can tune them, I can make very different coefficients.
And different people came up with an hypothesis saying what actually could be the other way around.
Maybe all of the many body aiding states of the system, maybe each individual island state looks already a permanent island.
If each state looks the microeconomic ensemble, then whatever prefectures I put in front of them, I will get the same answer in front of.
And this is a hypothesis that was first formulated in current form by Deutsche and specifically sort of three years ago.
And this goes under the name of the ageing state feminisation hypothesis.
And the hypothesis, and mathematically speaking, is that if I take in many steps, I look at the expectation value a I of a few body observable.
I'm not looking at the full system or looking at a part of the system, see a few particles.
Of a few body observable, eight in an ageing state of Epsilon Epsilon Energy Epsilon, I have a mytilene of a large interacting many buddy system,
two thinking about the system that we would expect to formalise a large system
of many interacting particles and that peak on one of the I can say that.
Then the hypothesis is that this expectation value equals to from an average meaning the microkernel, the prediction.
And the parliament state at the same energy.
That's basically saying that the prediction of each state for the expectation value of each of the observable in each state will look the same,
in the in the Michael Clarke ensemble. each state individually looks at the former state.
And then, of course, A. Random mixture of agencies would also look a farm state because you're just mixing many of the same things.
this is a an hypothesis, and this needs to be tested in every system.
And. This is written very generically by saying if you very observable.
What's conceptually and very good point is to say, well, a special example is to reduce density matrix of a small subsystem.
basically, what this thing says is that if I take a small subsystem.
And I look at the density matrix to reduce density matrix I get, which is the expectation value of this density matrix operator.
Basically, it's saying that the subsystem formalises the subsystem looks a firm density matrix,
even if the whole system cannot look a full density matrix. it's back to the picture that we had in the beginning.
You have to speak to your state with a lot of entanglements between the different parts of the system.
And then there's a consequence of that of the auditors entanglement, if you forget it.
And you just look at the part of the system, it looks a former state.
if you look at say, for instance, the momentum distribution you're measuring at,
one political observer would think the momentum of this project to the next part of the next political and so on.
If you project them all out, you measure them all out.
You get a perfectly firm answer, even though in reality, it's one complicated and tangled, pure way function of all of the particles.
that's the idea, it's very, very powerful.
And the point is, if I want to prove that it's not a formal state, but it's really a pure state still and political system,
I have to measure these and political correlations to prove that in any political way, functions of the pure.
people are nowadays measuring something six other population functions or 10 for accommodation functions, and they feel very smart about it.
But they're doing this in a system of tens of thousands of particles.
we have infinitely far away from being ever able to measure at 10 and auto correlation function,
just the amount of statistics you would need would be crazy. And this basically means for us that.
We just ignore these high order correlations, we just see all of these high order correlations in a farming system,
we can just ignore them because they're not accessible and they don't do anything for us.
we know that we can go to the point of saying that the feminisation of the
whole system is philosophically one it stays if you wave function at all time.
But it is a hugely simplifying and extremely useful approximation. Because it does not lead to any false prediction for possible measurement.
It would only give you the one predictions if you want to really measure and particle correlation functions,
which you never, ever would be able to do, so you can ignore the point.
And that's the story, and the story has, of course, many, many funny consequences.
The first consequences that we always talk about humanisation and of course, quantum system, we talk about the system electing to affirm its state,
we measuring our B.S., we're measuring its temperature and so on, and we say, Yeah,
this is a of state, even though we strictly speaking, no, that it can't really be.
But we know that for anything we ever might care about, that's what it is.
if you part of a quantum system, say, universe. But you only can, look at your local environment.
Then that might very well just look a foreign environment, even though the universe as a whole is in a pure state.
everything looks it's just hanging together and would just work fine.
Now, of course, we have all of this kind of theory is correct for the whole universe,
but the point of describing the universe a society moved away from it in its to begin with.
We don't know. And the point is, what this suggests is that also we have no way of finding out.
Whatever the universe started to have entropy or start the pure because we can only observe a small part of it.
There's not really a chance for us of ever finding out. At least according to these arguments.
OK, so let's look at this now numerically in the last ten minutes.
we have the same system as before, it's the same treaty system as before.
What they are doing is they say, OK, we look at the momentum distribution.
And now we're not talking at the time evolution we're just looking at, say, the microkernel Nicholas humble excuse me this line,
and they're looking at the prediction of two island states take I said one, I can stay two and look,
these island states, they have the same energy in a microcosm, but lost a bit of energies. You see, they really give you the same distribution.
it really looks these 18 states individually already look the formulas on them yet as you would expect.
What you can see down here is they can all say, OK, let's take a good one observable. This distribution of X equals zero.
And the plot is just the function of the energy of the Eigen state.
And there's calculators for all I can say, it's it's cause for calculator every state.
What is the prediction of of this?
And one result that you got is you would have to say that all I can say is we have the same energy must give you the same answer.
What? Because they all correspond to the same ensemble. they have to give you the same answer.
Otherwise, the whole story breaks down and can't be true. And it's neat that you say here, Well, OK, we didn't see that one straight line one.
One nice line. One of the exits, it's a very close to each other. Where people live now in the years since then have done is to say, well,
there's a certain with the twist to this line and we say there could be final size effect.
that's good. a good test of of a system now based on what is to say,
let's take different observables and look at the width of this line as we increase system size.
the relative drift of the line so that absent of absolute must get smaller, smaller, smaller.
And then I can say, okay, well, because it would be informative to make limited would really be.
A straight line, a sharp line, as we would expect. And that's generally what you get.
That's generally what you see. And if you compare this now to the same kind of experiment, but just done a one day change,
you just have not left half of a chain half of the 2021 zero opened open to the open,
the tunnelling between the two sites and they look at again, what is the microkernel Oklahoma?
Michael Clarke a prediction is kind of the one one thing to diagnose home.
It is giving me a very different thing so that darkness does not coincide with the microcontroller ensemble.
my time evolution would not go to a formal state because it would not go to the Crichton ensemble.
And indeed, I can now say that I can see that wagon states have two very separate lines or they do something very different.
And the same thing is, you know, look again that you see it well, well.
The dots all over the place to the island states are not all behaving in the same way.
And this is typically what you would expect for a non chaotic and non-alcoholic and non sermonising system.
And as in the classical case,
you would expect that Huckabee isn't in one deep are in fact an integral part system because it's really Newton's cradle.
You have hard balls that can't pass through each other because you have this infinitely strong repulsion.
it's really this classical system. here this is compatible.
And this one violates. And that's basically the status where we are, because you can only test systems and check every compatible hypothesis or not.
And so far and all of the systems that people have checked. They got the answer you would expect.
They got when your system really looks a film a show summarising behaviour, it seems to be fulfilled.
And if you see that it does not show feminising behaviour and also it just violated.
people are getting gaining more and more trust and saying, well, we should.
We get more and more believe that it is the truth that it's really a valid hypothesis that it works.
But as far as I know, there's no way of mathematically proved this at the moment, so it remains an hypothesis.
the picture that he didn't have is, uh, feminisation in the classical state,
because the feminisation and the quantum mechanics is the very different cartoon.
the cartoon, it's like, OK, well, we have a configuration space, it can be, look, whatever.
And we have a hyper plane in the air of constant energy. if you now say I take a classical system, I think about,
I think about what happens when the classical system started at one point on my parameter space.
And then due to and will evolve around this effect, some kind of motion runs based on that constant energy, of course.
And if this is chaotic, we basically go to all of the points we have.
The so-called economics really visits every point on this hyper plane and basically then says that, OK, well, you have a good economics.
You just know the energy. You can't predict what the system is going to be at a certain amount, a certain point in time.
If the dynamics would not be chaotic, would just be too close to orbit, say, for instance, it would have regular pandemics.
But it's really chaotic. In the.
And the quantum system, on the other hand, you would say, OK, I have one of these ageing states and they all look a former state.
However. If I say I have to say Nation State statement, a party would say it sits here,
then it can make a superposition of all of those states that a time two equals zero.
We'll just have accepted as part of the party that sits there. the simple example, if you go back to this June heating effect, you would say,
Well, I want to make a wave if wave functions that spend the whole system.
the way function is OK, it's in the hydrogen atom is left plus right,
there's one I can see the left minus this, the other I can state, so both I can see it's spread out of left and right.
But if I then, as initial states take a position of state one plus state two,
I can have it such that the wave function at the left hand site interfere constructively while on the
hand site interfere destructively and then they end up of the particle being firmly just on the left site.
that would be my initial state.
I can say to spread over the whole system, but the particles just in the left hand site because the position is such that the dust is.
And that's what we say it is this the island states looked from a state.
But this position is such coherence is such that maybe the project is only at this point in a world.
And then what we say is going on and time is basically just a defacing between
all of these states because each state oscillates with its own frequency.
the oil can become out of sync.
And then at some point you can neglect the time that you can say, Okay, well, I now just don't have coherence and you are left.
The firmest state is just the incoherent mixture of all of those states,
and because they all individually and state, the mixture also looks the former state.
And he is also a nice point about poker currencies and about why you need a big system for this.
If you think about what I said just before the time I left, plus wide left minus right.
And then, you know, if you do, this is the two level system, so you know that the political oscillate from the left to the and back to the
left because you only have one frequency in the game because you have two states.
But if you now have, say, a million states.
And their frequencies are all different, and the frequencies are also not congruent to each other, so it's not one two three four five,
but a million random numbers, then you would say that all of those things differed from each other very quickly.
If they were all in phase, the time and energy phase, they would never we phase because of all of these different increments with frequencies.
then you get the point of where you really say it is this chaotic and you have this idea of the coherence is just going to get the former state.
OK. that's the picture, that's the picture of how people think about these kind of states and quantum mechanics.
And now let me.
Yeah, just show a few things, so people have done some experiments in this direction, and I go very quickly, but they're just there for illustration.
one thing it can do is you can say, OK, if I have a system initially with very low entanglement of the lines,
you indicate entanglement of both sites are like, this is let us model. They're decoupled.
Think of what insulator, but there's almost no entanglement.
You would measure always one particle Four-Letter site and then you crunch into like, say, a superfluid, which you very quickly and tunnelling.
Then you know, OK as a unitary dynamics. it stays a pure state but have lots of entanglement.
And if I now look at an observer with just one letter site, how many patterns we have and let asite,
I look at, I get something that looks a problem distribution.
you can calculate this by saying, OK, what is the entropy of my thermal distribution that I get on the other site?
And why? The answer for that is to say, well, it's basically a moment and think of it entropy between the subsystems.
we have a global system. Which is in a pure state of identity matrix as pure as no entropy.
But even now, we're going to take a partial trace and just look at a subsystem.
It's just the density base insite a. Then it can calculate what is the entanglement and just using the normal formula trace role of Rolfe.
And it turns out that this one is finite and non-zero, so I can expect that the entanglement entropy,
the amount of entanglement between the different subsystems will look up something determined entropy or my of my subsystem.
And that's the idea, how you can quantify and get entanglement in quantum systems.
In the end, it's Unitarian Nemec, so it's all just entanglement being built up because you can follow it through.
It looks the entanglement entropy, which is a measure of the entanglement. Looks the fervent entropy locally speaking.
And I should say that, OK, if you look up this paper, they're not using the phenomenon entanglement entropy because it's too complicated to measure.
They're using another definition of tyranny entanglement entropy. If you look at this a little bit further,
you realise that the whole story of rich entanglement measures to use and which definition of entropy is there are.
Gets very complicated, very quickly.
what they did in another experiment a bit later on this, they said, OK, let's start with they want more and more insulated from.
They looked at that one. The political no basis, and they said, OK, Willie, as you see, OK, it's just one political politicised.
It's a local state. Then they let the devolve into sort of regime for political to a lot of a tunnel around.
And if they didn't look at the political, no distribution, they get something this, which looks a form of distribution.
For the experts, how can they measure particle numbers of two, three, four five?
Didn't we say that the best microscopes only do this kind of parity projection?
The answer is it's a good trick because they only start of at these two copies of the system, these two lines here.
But they said they want to measure particle number. What they do is they make the lattice in this direction very deep.
But there's no tunnelling between the letter sites anymore. But then they allow for tunnelling along this direction and the transverse direction.
you basically say you the system of many particle starting out here now allow for tunnelling in this direction of a lot of sites,
and then it's very unlikely if I have, say,
five particles that they issue up in the same that society will typically spread out over five different little sites.
And then I can just imagine a total particle, no longer one vertical line.
And that gives me and the particle number that was initially on one of those that decides.
And then they can do something very clever that they don't have time to explain.
They can do something where they do global purity test by doing some kind of many bad interference basically hit if two lines,
so they have two copies of the same system.
And then by using tunnelling between these two systems, if anybody beam splitter they can measure every state is globally pure or not.
what they can show is to do the crunch, and they wait after they quench the global purity,
well, OK, it takes a little bit, but it essentially stays pure.
globally, they can show that the system of whatever in six letter sites here stays globally pure, but locally it looks from.
it shows exactly on this very small, microscopic scale the physics that we have discussed.
entanglements between the subsystems and the subsequent system then appears locally feasible, even though it's close you.
OK. Of a quick. OK, let me let me.
Let me actually stop the beach, skip this one, and just a very quickly say this part here.
this is Nick. This is an experiment that we actually needed. Uh. More than 10 years ago now we said, OK, let's take another call.
It's it with an insulator of particles sitting in lattice this roughly harmonic
trip and then switching off the ionic traps of the particles can easily spread out.
And we are asking how fast do they spread out? What is the velocity with which the particles can spread through the lattice?
And then you kind of realise that that's kind of an interesting question to ask because of the politics of money directing,
you would expect the ballistics spreading of. But if the particles are classically interacting,
you would expect that there is diffusion going on that they move much, much slower and they move in the diffusive way.
you can look at this and you can actually say, OK, let's try to look at the expansion speed that you get as a function of the interaction.
This is the first Mohabbat model to you, adjust the strength of the interaction.
And you can indeed see that not interacting particles expand very fast. But then you party particles proven to be positive and attractive sites.
It's much, much slower.
And this is a problem that if you wanted to calculate this quantum mechanically two dimensional system, thousands of particles,
many, many lighter sites non-equilibrium quantum dynamics impossible to calculate quantum mechanically far too complicated.
However, when you think about this physically, you would say, OK,
what will happen where these little particles were locally scattered all the time off each other?
If the dynamics are psychotic,
I would expect that in locally families that have a look little patch with a certain temperature and a certain chemical potential.
And then I would expect that the slower global dynamics of the whole part moving out,
I should be able to describe the classical theory gradients in temperature and chemical potential to something a classical diffusion theory.
And the classical theory that does this is the the Boltzmann equation, classical Boltzmann equation,
and you can see if you use the classical equation, you get something for the peak if it's very, very well.
And it's kind of funny and annoying and amusing, because the quantum problem.
Even the best superconductors, the best supercomputers would have no chance of solving it.
But if you say, well, in this case, this quantum system, because it creates so much entanglement, if we just think of this entanglement as entropy.
It's a simple classical problem, and basically, yeah, this line you can put use on your iPhone within seconds.
The calculations in that sense, numerically not very heavy because you throw away all of this complicated entanglement that close up and say,
it's just fine, I can ignore it. Last case very, very briefly, though, is to say if we do this in one day.
But if the polls are, how about model,
then they also get the same thing because the are how about model is not integral and people could show 15 years ago that it's actually
classically chaotic in the case of intermediate use and intermediate energies for not everywhere but in the most chaotic way into this chaotic.
If you take attacking particles in the balls or have a model, it's of course integral because the momentum of.
And if you take we did on this previous numerical example, how cobblestones and one dimension that it turns out, it's also integral.
And it turns out that you can actually map this using your vehicle transformation, but you might have seen in TV, too.
You can map this onto non-threatening spin this women's. If you have not seen a transformation, don't worry, you don't need it.
It's just to say we know how it behaves. We know the hard components behave exactly monitoring fermions.
he has done my last slide. What you now look at is expansion velocities for bosonic systems again as a function of data ActionScript.
The perpetrator here are two that he did this to you.
We again have this huge spike at end directing particles and then very quickly it goes down to essentially zero and nothing you can do.
Yes, very, very slow diffusive dynamics because the system is formalising.
However, if you do it in one day, you see the same onset velocity goes down a lot because the system starts to be formalising.
Classical theory is correct. But then you see, it turns out again,
it becomes fast again and then the hot condiment because you have this quantum mechanical mapping from protons to Fermi.
It looks normal talking particles, again going fast.
this is a regime, but it's a quantum part is very, very important because this mapping business to ferment is a purely quantum thing.
It doesn't exist classically.
in some cases, we can just throw classically everything quantum away and say, OK, this is just effectively classical dynamics.
While in other cases, we have to say, well. There is a classical mapping, but it's very different when we consiter quantum effects.
The other vehicle transformation a really, really important to you. Quantum statistics are the key to this.
it tells us that we really have to be creative when we do quantum simulations and asking or asking questions, OK, what can they use?
What kind of approximations? And then I need to have the experiment to check whether this approximation is actually valid or not.
Because you can do another type of approximation. That's how we actually started this business, that's why it's a nice story.
You can make another approximation in 2-D, which predicts very, very good to the approximation, which predicts very,
very interesting, dynamic and 2D and predicted in 2D used to also go up again and get very fast the ballistic.
And you get a very nice moving condensate.
And we've been spending a coffee and lab trying to find this moving condensate because the theory tells us it must be there.
And then at some point we started to think about this in a different way, looking at the permanent mix of it instead of actually wait a second.
Probably the approximation of its fury, even though it was widely used at the time, is just plain one for this case.
It's a tail off when you make an approximation, if you always have to make approximations, of course,
but you have to be very careful which ones are good ones and which ones are maybe misleading in certain areas.
you always need fact the experiments to recount you and tell you, yes, this approximation is better than no.
Now you're thinking in the wrong direction. And, of course, very often in these cases and hindsight is obvious, in hindsight,
it's like, yes, of course, here we have many, many more parties participating.
we're good for the under two, which basically just has one mode that looks into can't be correct.
And you would say, OK, taking a step back if you have a single good approximation, they can never see a chaotic dynamics.
I can only see chaotic enemies of many, many, both that can interfere and do stuff. in hindsight, it all makes sense.
But still, you need to experiment to get to that point. OK.
And that's basically the end for today. Thank you very much.
I have uploaded the next problem, said.
the next day, the next supervisions would be next weak and the next one next Friday afternoon, join the club.
We should be able to do in person. I attend confirmation about that early next weak.
And then last weak, also the last two lectures and then the weak thereafter,
we will again have the last two positions and then the last journal club and last journal club.
We catch on for a bit longer because that only also then going to be a good revision point for you.
we'll have if you want an extended office or beforehand where you can just ask
any kind of questions you have and we can discuss any of problems that you might have.
And that shouldn't prepare you very well for the exam and everything. OK, thank you very much.
See you next weak.
