And quick reminder where we ended up last week, we said, OK, the effects of magnetic fields are very interesting.
They're relevant, for instance, the quantum hall effect, spin hall effect, topological insulators and many, many other things.
And these topological protected events are very important.
The problem we have of cold atoms is that we don't directly coupled to a magnetic field in the same way that
you would do if you would have a charge because you're not charged so you don't have to laurence force.
And then you have tolerance for so you have no classical mechanical effect and also you don't have know how to form phase.
And that means that it's very hard to simulate those effects.
And the idea how you do it is you use berry phases, which we introduced last weak and quickly went through it again and payouts phase,
as you would see later today, to simulate the effect of the of boom phase.
Because if you do that, then you basically simulate the whole effect of the magnetic field on the Hamiltonian,
which means that everything else also follows from that. So.
We spent quite some time last on Tuesday discussing the very phase,
and we said that the idea is that if I have an isolated state, so no degeneracy is nothing simple system.
That's not often the tone of the first day to time zero being an aching state of Hamiltonian.
And then I moved my Hamiltonian around the parameter space, so I slowly changed Hamiltonian in time.
This could, for instance, mean that I slowly change the fields of the parameters of a laser field,
or I slowly change to magnetic field disturbances or as we would see later on.
If I have a Bloch with a quasi momentum, I will force slowly change the quasi momentum,
so move the particle around in the preowned zone and to form a closed loop.
I come back to the original state that basically because I was adiabatic, the only thing I've picked up is a phase factor.
And this phase factor we saw has two parts at Anamika Phase, which is just the injection of the energy over time.
And this berry phase of geometric phase, and we say the geometric phases of phase that does not depend on time,
it does not depend on evolution speaker, which would go around a certain loop,
but it is fully determined by the geometry of this path that you've take to where you've been in parameter space.
And then we saw that you can express this in the form of, say, it's the gradient in parameter space of the wave function.
it's basically asking if a change is parameter and Hamiltonian versus the magnetic field.
How does the EIGEN statement that I mean evolves and then projected back onto the state to take it as?
And then I take the ring into the vector and then it could be  the ring integral of the vector along this line of the closed form.
And that's how I get back to a phase scalar. it's independent of the evolution of speed.
And then we said that is the part that you put you in the indiquant sorry gradient upsite.
It's called the Bury Connexion, and the cut of that is something that's called the berry curvature.
And we would see that this is analogous to the magnetic vector connexion and the magnetic field.
And one thing that's important to say here is why do we make this emphasis about going around a closed loop?
Why is this place picked or not defined for any  thing? And the answer is that you have a greater freedom in quantum mechanics, civility,
bigotry, but you have an ongoing feud at the story is actually very simple.
It's just fancy language.
If you haven't Hamiltonian where anything I can sort of do Hamiltonian to epsilon energy epsilon, then if you multiply the state end of a phase III.
Just a number, then, of course, that one is also an icon state of the Hamiltonian,
because number two, when you commute with just a number, you can just put it through.
whatever you define and as you can state or you eat you, the ICAI end, as you can state, that's fully up to you.
Doesn't change anything in the physics, it's just a phase factor.
It needs to be just a phase factor, because we say Oregon State needs to be normalised. But that's the only thing there was about it.
And this is called a you want freedom because the group of numbers of the from Italy icon what Christ will be number.
That's the one group, the rotations along the circle, if you want.
And that's basically just the gay treatment you have to.
this makes sense, you can choose whatever basis you want, you can choose the can function in multiple factors and suggest that I can function.
But this, of course, means that if I say, let's start at this stage here and then move to another point in parameter space and ask,
what is the perspective that I have here? Well, that's the totally arbitrary, because that depends on what definition I choose.
For that point, I put it wavefunction. I can always make this phase, but it gets to an evolution here.
Zero, by just saying, OK, let me just change the definition of my wavefunction or my basis date accordingly.
That adjust end up of a positive parameter in front of it. You can. You could always do that.
this is an open path. And therefore we say that this phase of evolution is Professor Gates dependent quantity.
If you change like, say, the definition of your initial state by multiple factor of the final state,
then you change the very phase it would get along this path. And this age dependent quantities, they are not observable.
They just think if you wanted something some magical artefact because you can gauge the move where you can make them zero.
all of this is for nothing.
Well, no, because if you take a path, that's a closed path where you start at this one point, go a closed loop and come back to the same point.
Then it turns out you get a independent quantity.
Because if he wanted to change the gauge by, say, change the initial state, you get an icon from changing the initial state,
but you also, on the other hand, get you to the minus IQ from also changing the final state if you initiate the final state at the same.
It's not too independent phase factors that you can change.
It's the same phase with the here and there, and it's you looking at the difference between the two changing.
It doesn't do anything, so it's a well-defined quantity. It's the same thing as if you would say that if you think of Democratic Victor,
potentially it's age dependent property, so you can change a lot how it looks.
But just adding this, gradient terms to it.
However, to call off that the magnetic field, that's a gauge independent, real physical property that you can measure in the lab and all of that.
And that's an element of reality. the same thing you have here, the phase you get along an open path is gauge dependent,
so not observable because you can always change it by just changing definitions of your states.
But the phase along a closed loop that's independent, that's observable and well-defined.
There's nothing you can do to change that because it's the same end point, a starting point.
And also, it also make sense on a very intuitive physical level because you have to realise that the phase of a wave function is not an observable.
How would you do an experiment where you measure the phase of a wave function? The answer is you cannot you can never measure your phase.
The only measure density to measure something is one minus one. You measure a particle is there or not there.
you can never measure a phase factor. However, what you can always do is you can make it into premature, right?
We split a wave into two parts. Combine them and interfere them.
And then, of course, the web interphase between these two parts, the relative phase between two parts.
That's a very well-defined quantity that of the light goes left or right.
if you just picture your interferometer in the easiest possible way, and it could probably also already use one of Matis plots here.
But it's just making you want if you just say, OK, I have my my light coming in.
Let's think about life is the easiest. There's a beam splitter. I make a machine at the front door.
There's the second beams that are here and I ask how much light comes out here and how much light comes out there.
And then you know that this one is proportional to cosine squared off the pace that I pick up along the slope to do the relative
pace between this path minus this puff and to phase this path minus this puff is the same phase as the phase of this path,
plus this path in reverse. it's actually. The phase of a closed loop.
whenever you can think of something being an interferometer, we really split something and we combine it.
It turns out that's always  a closed loop, so it's also a physically observable faith factor.
this buffer medical staff totally makes sense with what you intuitively think about what can be measured and what not.
It makes perfect sense. OK.
OK. And yet here's a guy in the heat that we had last time where we said that the
very phase is a real phase that can be measured the heart of warm phase,
and we say that this very connexion is the same estimate, getting back the potential that the berry curvature is the same as the magnetic field.
In some sense, this is a special case of this general phenomena. This is a special case of the magnetic field and we base here.
This is an arbitrary parameter spaces. It could, for instance, be quasi momentum space in the lattice.
And that's  what we're going to look at because we want to combine artificial gauge fields a lot of the time with lattices.
what are the consequences of this if we now say we have to spend torture, we can calculate in advance to acquire this bury connexion.
It turns out if you do the semi classical theory of transport, you know what you normally have in condensed matter physics.
You would say, OK, I have the effect the force of an electric field. That's the absolute that's the point is to force it, act on it.
And they have the presence of a magnetic field. Then they get this cross to endure.
And it turns out if you do the same analysis, it is actually done. The Cooper here in TeamGroup 10 years ago.
Now, it turns out that if you do this, you do the same to me.
Classical analysis you get the following part you get the point that if I have an
external force acting on a particle that changes the momentum of the particle, that's novel.
And if I look at the weird space velocity of the particle harvest of particle moving, I get the first term.
We just do dispersion relation, which is the normal transport, anomalous transport, the epsilon decay, the cool velocity of the particle.
And I got an animal a second term,
which is $k$ Dot cross-border cliff does that vector and the berry phase at the berry curvature at this point in case basis.
what this means is that if you have particles and you have, say, a food looks bad and you have a band structure,
you do have positive, say berry curvature, the band structure, then you will get that the particles will move at the very company.
You see that direction, you will move along something.
Dot Cross said the cross product is in there, which basically means that if I have a plot, if I have a force in one direction.
I, of course, get this movement here, which is along this direction is a Bloch of isolation moving up and down.
But I also get a siteways movement because it this cross-border issue.
And that's exactly the same thing as you have in the classical hall effect,
where you would say that we have a magnetic field in this direction and the particles moving in that direction could have force pushing me siteways.
you have a movement dot moving me siteways.
And it turns out that you can calculate this if you calculate it for a third band and for many, many, many oscillations,
the first time will average out because you have these Bloch oscillations to go up and down and up and down the first of an average to zero.
But the second term, we're not average to zero.
To the second term, we'll give you something that's proportional to the integral of the berry curvature over the whole prevenzione.
If you have a footprint that's obvious and that turns out to be a number which will come back to the next slide.
if you have something that's topological and trivial and you sort of force on it in this direction,
you will get a response that the whole system moves siteways, in the hall effect.
OK. And then you can go to an mathematical story of this and you can say, well.
What can I do, I can do the following the following thing Let's first start with this picture up here.
This is a Prius on wheels qualities, and let's say we start with a parameter particle somewhere in the Prius when
we start here and then we move the particle along this loop parameter space.
we exert forces on the particle accelerator for us to be accelerated along a soccer direction.
And then we come back to the same point and we can calculate we'll get a very phase.
But you can calculate of to ring and equal off the back of the above Tiberi connexion around this area.
you can calculate this one where it's just at the antiquities to ring and taken over this little ring and you calculate the very phase.
Equivalent to using a stroke serum, you could, of course, also say, well,
that's the the surphase area of the integral of the area insite here of the berry curvature.
That's  been close to this. That's the same calculations you do put it on a form effect.
You can calculate the vector potential along the trajectory, or you can calculate the magnetic flux enclosed by the thing.
here, the integral of the berry curvature we call the very flux, and it's again the berry flux and close in this area gives me the very first.
And the conceptual interesting step is to say, well, let's make this bigger and bigger and bigger,
such that this path at some point and closes the footprint on. Like this?
Then the reality along longest war zone is basically the same as calculating the berry curvature over the whole prehensile.
is exactly the calculation we also saw in the previous slide when we say, OK.
And you have to take the very curvature averaged over the whole prism because all of the states are occupied.
And now there's a cute mathematical mathematical point, which is really cute.
It's the point is that when you think of the zone, you no think of it as as quick as a square.
But you noted, actually, it's a Taurus.
Because the reason this can Bloch isolations, if you're if your momentum is only defined modulo the reciprocal little spectre,
then if you add out this part one,
the less gives you just to the average of the presence of these two edges of the zone that actually do the same line.
Once you get to one, it's like, what is operation? You end up on the air and on the other site, so they're connected on this site.
And these two lines appear, they're connected on the other site. that basically means that this area here.
It's just the surphase of a Taurus.
It has no boundary because the prions on its periodic test may be the easiest way of saying it can't have a boundary prions on its periodic.
And it has the topology of a Taurus because you see two different directions X and Y.
And if you have this picture, you can then say, OK, well, how does such a curfew look on the tourist?
Well, it's  a deformed circle somewhere on the surphase of the tourist. That makes sense.
But if I want to go all around the boundaries of this, what do I do? Well, I start with the tourist.
And let me maybe make another throwing for this.
And whenever I have not tried a talk for a long time, I go to therapy one woman the first try but and see where we are.
this is our tourist. No, it's OK, it's recognisable.
let me start at some point this point, say, and then go once around the tourist ones about the tourism direction.
if we say I start here and then I go once around the tourist in one direction, so I go here and I would come back to essentially the same point.
But let me stop just before that point just to make clear what's happening. that was this line.
Now let's say I go this line here, I go up to I go to one spot direction to tourists again,
almost a full rotation, which basically means I go along this axis.
I go up here, come back down to the back site, come back up here, go to this point.
Now I'm up here, now I go back, so I go back in the direction that I originally went here.
But in the opposite directions, I basically  following a line parallel to this first line back around the tourists and this direction.
To hear. And then I go back, I unwind by going back around the tourism, this case,
that's how I close the loop so you can see how this whole surphase here is now.
Stretched throughout the surphase of the Taurus. And now.
You have to take the appropriate curvature, which is the very curvature. You can say, well,
I have few room to be discussed on Tuesday and know that this integral of the berry
curvature over this whole area must be quantised must be mindful of two particles penny.
You can also say, well, actually, what you're doing here is you're  never really moving, why doing moving, moving around?
The whole thing is doing nothing. because you come back to the same point, which basically means that again,
for the wavefunction to be self-consistent to be have only one value.
It must be a multiple of two pie the same argument we have of what vortices?
there's both mathematical arguments, proofs and unintuitive arguments why this phased possibly multiple of two.
And then you can just say, Well, okay, did I take this integral and I divide it by two PI, then I get I must get a positive integer here.
I must say I must get an integer here.
The number of zero one two three minus one minus two must be something this because it must the phase must be multiple of two points.
And this number is not quite the first number of such a manifold.
we have got to convince ourselves that this number, which is just the interior of the berry curvature, must be an integer.
And then there was the so-called the famous Tkay and gang thought as promoted in Youth Nightingale in 30 years ago, 40 years ago, in 1982,
the paper came out and this is one of the papers that followed has got the Nobel prise for it was two years ago,
two years ago or last year because they could prove that the high conductance must be given by exactly.
Is away available H.H. times this show?
No. And this is  funny.
This is  really telling us, know what you think about this transverse movement.
If you do this in the appropriate units, what you realise is if I take the whole cloud and then move at once,
I want to pourrions on in one direction and I think about what a cloud ends up in real space.
It basically tells us that must have hopped one lattice site to the left.
But to the right, you cannot have hope, hovered at the site because then that would be stupid because the politics is going to be at the minimum,
but at the maximum of the potential of it can't be fanatically makes a lot of sense that these steps must be quantised.
If I go once I want the prayers on One Direction, I must do an integer number of steps to the left or to the right.
And that's exactly topological protect a transport move exactly one charge around the system doing one cycle.
Or I say my whole conductive, whole conductance must be precisely quantised with these values.
And now suddenly the thing that we discussed when we discussed the horrific where we said, OK, why is this number not changing?
Why must it be one or two and going to be one plus something if I put this order in or temperature or anything?
Now it makes sense because the underlying structure is that it must be quantised for these mathematical reasons.
OK, so here's the here's the hall effect again. this is the equation we saw last time.
What is not a China? No, understand better what it is. It's the China number is the integral over the berry curvature of the food.
We for a given bed. And then the case was to this precisely quantised potatoes you.
Good. And as I said, this is what we want to a first demonstration of called items.
And at the end of the lecture today, you will see that we've achieved this or less.
And then the next goal for the next decade, so to speak, is this one.
Combining this of strong interactions are getting to the fraction of quantum hall effect. So.
One other good way of thinking about this, which is a very neat way to think about it, is to say, OK, if I have this whole conductance,
I have this  topological to protect a transport where the particles move around the edge and all of those  things.
I can think of them also in a different way. I can think of some of them. See, we classically by having these what we call it, skipping orbits.
you noted that we have an electron and have a magnetic field.
Then the electron, we move on a little circle Typekit in orbit, and then you can ask what happens if I have such a Typekit on orbit?
Not in the middle of the material, but at the edge of the material where you say, for instance, the vacuum on upper insulator.
Then you  would say, OK, well, the particle would be on this orbit.
He hit the boundary and then it would bounce off, reflect off the boundary if it's elastic,
conserve energy, but it can go off in any direction, whatever you want.
However, the key thing is because once a speck in the material, it will start to curve again because of the magnetic field.
whatever direction it goes on, it will turn around and bounce back against the wall.
it is orbits must skip along the wall.
And then you can think of the magnetic field giving you one set of direction, it's orbiting in one way, not the other way.
And that basically means that all of those particles up here, they are moving to the right.
And that's a very peculiar thing, because what this means is that you must have a protected transport here where
you can't have a diffusive transport because there can't be backscatter. if I have a particle of what we call this etched channel,
so on the edge here that moves to the and you say the purity nobody would say is a beauty channel
can can make you scatter backwards into a backwards channel where you go instead of $k$ with $-k$.
And normally you always have this $k$ minus $k$ symmetry.
And that means that it gives you damping of your transmit because the parties are not taking part in the main transport anymore.
Now, in this case, because all of the particles really have to do this  skipping of it, they must go back to the right.
and even if you if you calculate this now, indeed, you will see that he has to wait and spend.
He is the conduction band of the pilot material. And then here is one edge mode that pushes the gap.
This is the most living. He accepted the edge and you can see that there's only one mode, and it's  always pointing to the right.
the only case I was positive in this case, which means it always has a positive velocity to the right.
there's only particles moving in one direction, not in the other direction.
And that's also the explanation for when you go back to the hall resistance that if you look at the longitudinal resistance.
Which points to a need to apply in the X direction to drive this currently extraction.
You would see that this longitudinally resistance is actually zero wherever we have these plateaus where we have this past all at once for us.
We have zero resistance, which basically means that there is no backscatter scattering.
There's no make transport, no diffusion. The particles that we detect moving through ballistically through the system.
And it turns out they're moving to the edges.
And the key thing that we have here for us to take away message for this one is that all of those things, the churn number itself,
all of those things tell us that in order to have any of those effects, you need to break time reversal symmetry.
Time reversal symmetry implies that if I have a mode of momentum going in one direction,
I also must have the mode before the mind is going the opposite direction, so we have to break that.
And the way you practise and all of these systems is by applying the magnetic field,
because the magnetic field is the one field that is not symmetric because it get
a few turns into minus a magnetic field if you reverse the direction of time. And that also intuitively makes sense.
If you think about electric fields, you have a particle sitting here that creates a magnetic field.
If you change direction of time, the particles are still sitting here. the electric fields do the same.
But even if you have whatever magnetic field, you must have a currency of a particle moving for you.
Electrons flowing upwards the creative accounting field in this direction say if you change the direction of time,
you change the velocity of the particles and hence you change the direction of the magnetic field.
the magnetic field is the one thing that is and the time of us goes from B to minus B.
And if you calculate the berry curvature, which we haven't done yet, but if you would calculate it,
you would see that time inversion symmetry means that if I go from $k$ to $-k$.
I must also change in direction of the berry curvature,
so be goes to minus B and then if a integrate of a presence of a positive and negative K, the integral must be zero.
time reversal symmetry directly implies that the challenger must be zero. It also makes sense on a classical level.
What I'm saying is if the particles are accelerated before fast in this direction and then I'm saying they're moving siteways.
That takes time, reversal symmetry, because why are we moving this direction and not this direction, something my practise left wide symmetry?
And that's the problem. Time reversal symmetry. what we actually need to do, and it's a good way of thinking,
is we need to practically reversal symmetry if you want to be able to find actual number if you want to enable this artificial gadgets.
we need to figure a way of how can we interact with code atoms in such a way that breaks time reversal symmetry?
And that's now for the last half an hour, looking at a few methods of how this has been done in the experiment,
how this can be done, how this can be implemented. one method is to use position dependent West states.
the idea is that you use several High-Performance states of your item, so that only items in the one one state,
but also the one zero to one minus one state and then you couple them of laser fields.
the topic of geometry that people have looked at, this was pioneered by Minutest also already seven years ago now is to say we have a b c and then
we have these two laser beams coming in from two directions and they cover the internal state.
And then we calculate the twist states. The EIGEN states will do the calculation also on the programme, sir.
And you see that these laser fields have slightly different frequencies on my girl and omega plus omega.
And if you now calculate what happens, I need to think about the three Asian states of rubidium, so we have every good one in this case.
we have MF plus one zero and minus one and those three states,
they have different energies because of the Z1 splitting Omegas that this desirement splitting, we apply of ordinary magnetic field externally.
This will not give rise to any loans for us on something because the particles are charged,
but just provided Zeeman effect, which means that these three energies, these two states have different energies.
And then we can copy them 52 days, a few hours of one photo from the plaque and one photo from Vietnam.
And what's  crucial is that if you apply a significant magnetic field,
you not only get the linear Zeeman effect, you also get the first, the second or a quadratic Zeeman effect,
which basically means that if these laser fields a little bit, the retuning starter epsilon delta here, they have opposite signs on these two sites.
we have to continue. And now I get by having them in the presence of these laser fields.
It's a three level system I can calculate. I can states the so-called red state, and they will all depend on the rabi frequency.
the intensity of the laser light and on the shooting of the laser light and those parameters, they cannot be spatially dependent.
you see how we're getting back to this  berry phase type Hamiltonians,
where we said that the parameters of the Anatolian depend on where you are.
you get position dependent West states and the position dependent effect. if you do this.
You can say, for instance, if I have a geometry this, you can say, well, actually I can write down my wave function is a position of three terms.
The particle can be in state zero. This one and have momentum.
we only care about the momentum in the X direction here.
This is this direction, because that's where the two laser beams have different momentum, different kicks.
I can also say the particle absorbs a photo from the one beam emits a photo
and into the other beam and thereby changes its changes its Mastcam-Z state.
These states have different energy, so only the one way also changed. My magnetic energy is resonant.
that must be happening. I go from zero to the state one and I get a kick off to kill, or I can go to minus one and get a kick of minus two.
these are the three basic states we now have to play with, and we can execute it,
we can calculate the states what we get of those and you can you will do this with help on the problems propensity.
if you have this  situation and agree to a position of two different momentum and a different spin state.
And you do time of light in the appropriate way, you get a picture this. it is this time of light together with stronger imaging.
if you radiant during time of light along this direction.
to interpret this, we basically have three clouds, we have a cloud of momentum,
zero economic momentum minus two in a cloud of momentum, plus two. This should be these three components.
And the other imaging tells us that, oh, actually the one in the middle is also the one with spin projection zero.
it should be this one and the one up here with momentum plus two is the one with Webster in-state minus and state minus one.
As it should be, these things on the diagonal line as it should be, because it's only these  transitions that are being done.
OK, and now you calculated it, which you do numerically to three, but remember, Tony,
that you can't calculate numerically what you see here is always everything expressed in units of cakes.
off the momentum of the zero component. And then you know that if I take this, the plus one component has its momentum shifted by scale.
if you take the correct parabola here, that's the unperturbed uncoupled state zero, which is a parabola centred around momentum zero.
The parameters for the first eight plus one is shifted by two cail to this site,
and the one for the other one is you have to buy minus took to that site.
And then crucially, these three parabolas live at slightly different energies.
That's because two different tunings that we have here in the two laser beams, in the laser beams.
you see that this one parabola is slightly lower than this parabola.
OK, if you know how to put on the coupling terms between the Robin transitions put on the Omega,
what you get is you get this crossing again turns into divided crossing at the states,
repel each other they always do, and you get curves the red curve down here, the queen curve up here and a blue crop up here.
And the main point here is, I mean, intuitively,
it makes sense that the curve looks this at this curve is always repelled from the lowest states by this coupling,
and it's intuitive that this one has a minimum not at zero, but shifted to the because this state is slower than that state.
OK. And that's all of the magic that you need, because you can go on and say,
let me write down an effective Hamiltonian that describes this part down here to this relation and effective low energy Hamiltonian.
what I do is I just write this as a parameter around its minimum.
I write this as a form of power squared k max minus came in squared over two Instagram stars and effective models,
just taking care of all of the factors. I just have to say it's a shift, a parabola $k$ minus Cayman.
Which I cannot interpret as $k$ minus Q Times a quote unquote.
I'm saying I've not created an artificial gauge field. That means that have shifted the minimum of the property to a finite momentum.
Because that's exactly what you think of when you do this canonical part of looking at the moment a magnetic field,
you say it's $k$ minus Q a absolute squared.
this shift here is the effect of an artificial creation.
voila, we have now created an artificial gaits field, so we have created an artificial vector potential for particles in the slowest west state.
That's pretty cool. But it's, of course, purely mathematical at this point, it doesn't have a physical consequence because, as you know,
the gauge fields are dependent, so just having created something a constant gauge of it doesn't do anything.
It just means that a different mathematical description.
What you need to do in order to get real magnetic field is you need to make sure that you also have a kernel of this thing.
If Ace constantly is filled, so you need to add a spatial dependence to a.
you need to have different West states at different points. And the way to do this is not to add this little thing to your setup.
basically what you're doing here is you create a gradient in the ordinary magnetic field that you put in for these images.
You make you feel stronger at some places than other places. And basically what this does is it creates a spatially varying bit unique.
you retuning how different is to three parameters are shifted that depends on the position where you are.
It's one position it would be the same at one position, it would be very strongly shifted.
And that basically means you have spatially varying trust states. you have is basically burying vector potential.
And they can actually be simulate and calculate this vector potential and can say OK as a function of the position,
why we just this position along which they have this magnetic field gradient, the vector potential at some point is zero.
That's what this parameter is centred in the middle.
That's where, all of the Zeeman chips are the same and all of the three states that have the same energy.
And then you go to the One Direction.
This minimum becomes what we call this the minimum shift to the left, to the right, and you go higher up and the boom shifts in the other direction.
this is not something that should create an artificial an artificial magnetic field,
because if you have two cities gradient in there to one zero, you would expect a magnetic field.
And if they do the same time of light imaging, they did before. And lo and behold. You can see vortices appearing in this cloud.
And as we said before we were talking about a rotating system, the vortices,
our smoking gun of the simulating magnetic field because they show you that this magnetic
flux is piercing through and you get this rotation about the local magnetic field.
So, yeah, they have made it they have created an artificial magnetic field by doing this.
It's a little bit of a tour de force to get there, but I wanted you to understand the structure.
That's why I went about this in quite a bit of detail. What they can also do is they can also change this magnetic field in time by, for instance,
changing this gradient in time or by, for instance, switching on and off the lasers or changing the rugby frequency.
And then they get a type of derivative of the spectre potential.
And this time derivative, of course, gets Watson artificial electric field and then a subsequent paper,
if measured as it could confirm that this actually works exactly as you would expect from as textbook.
And again, Cooper and John Daly, but they then said, OK, can we make this stronger?
Because the problem that you have here is the the dynamic range of your vector potential is
 limited because here you only look at the one minute here you only have a minima.
There's not that much how you can change it, so you can't create very strong magnetic fields.
they asked can equate stronger magnetic fields, and the answer is yes, you can very, very strong ones if you like,
put in interfering lattice beams that  create these gradients of your optical potentials and very,
very small length to and then because of lambda over to so you can do very, very strong fields in this case.
And if they calculate the band structure in this  what they call optical flux lattice,
you can actually see that the band structure of this one has a density of states down here, and it's one very, very sharp, lowest level.
And that's what you expect for energy. Bottom them whole systems because you expect that you have very, very sharp Landau levels, lambda quantisation,
where all of these little Typekit and orbits, they have the same energy because they just a different positions.
But it's the same state, same orbit, and therefore they all have the same energy.
You get this massive degeneracy and the lowest level. on the theory site, this works.
On the practical site, though, there's a problem with this approach, because normally when you think about what we do with Typekit troops,
you say we live off the fact that the deeper potential is intensity of a delta.
Why this  thing we get this  thing where you depends intensity of our data's clear.
we say that normally if you just like, make this one,
we get the inevitable scattering if you just go for a very strong retuning and a very strong electric field.
The problem with these Raymond rate, which you corrected, I chipped, is that they also look one, would that just quit?
Which basically means that the tuning doesn't help anymore, and you get a significant heating rate from those covering it just.
it's not really practical for many ethical items.
People are now trying to do this for atoms strontium, for instance, where you have states,
where you have very, very narrow lines that you should be able to do this with less heating with.
But this is one way of doing it, another way of doing artificial foods is to say, can I do periodic modulations?
Can I take my system and shake it, say clockwise?
Because shaking it clockwise is, of course, the time it was a partner of shaking it counterclockwise.
we're shaking it in this circular manner. I directly break time reversal symmetry.
Right and the left hand. I practise cemetery by hand, by shaking it, and then I should see similar effect.
And the easiest way to see it is to say, let's take, say, a graphene Typekit at us,
and let's say we do something where we switch on the different tunnelling elements at different times.
for the first third of the cycle, we only have this tunnelling on for the second part of the second.
We have this tunnelling on and for the last part of the cycle, you have this tunnelling on.
And of course, if you have this tunnelling on, we also have this one on and this one on.
all of the ones that are horizontal and all of the ones that are  upper left and then all of the ones in the upper right.
And if you do this and if you think of a state at the Edge, say you have to sequence, you say, OK, well,
it once just goes down this way, but it can't really go any other way because have a ton of things off.
And then the next point I switch on the horizontal tunnelling, it can only go there. It cannot go any other way because they are off.
And then I have to ones in this direction. You can go and you go up there.
There's no other way you can see that this one must also in the sequence, follow  a skipping orbit type thing just around the edge.
the mutilation breaks time and symmetry. Fundamentally speaking, it's because one to three is clockwise and three two one is counterclockwise.
And they're not identical. And they are time reversal patterns of itself. if I take a one day system, just check it left right.
That's a sinusoidal modulation. The point is to time you and symmetric what?
But if I take something in 2-D, where do it  in a circular fashion that does break time reversal symmetry?
that's something that people have tried and indeed where they could see first effects.
This, by the way, goes back to Duncan Haldane, who also got the Nobel prise for the Typekit holding model,
which is basically to say Can I have your numbers and quantisation without a big external magnetic field?
And what he could show is that if you take graphene type lattices with like, complex nearest neighbour hopping,
so hopping from here to here, then you can come up with something that look, that looks you have got Fluxus.
We have not got getting fields pointing in and out of the sphere at different points of the Unitel, such as the average magnetic field to zero.
But you can still have bands with Panopto numbers. And.
This model was actually realised in cold atoms in the group of two men where they basically said,
OK, we create lattice in slightly more complicated fashion with interfering laser beam.
again, we have laser beams going back onto the camera and back in there.
And because we have the same frequency now going into directions, we get interesting cross terms,
which gives rise to this  a structure that we need here. And then we can do the shaking.
But just really physically shaking the pizza mirrors,
putting the mirrors on pizzas and move their positions because it creates the whole light field wide,
when you think of an interfering electric field, you'll always have a note at the Mirror.
if you move the mirror, the whole light filled with two notes and notes shifts around in space.
And by this, they could actually, like, try to like, get a structure you what you had there,
and they could basically show that you get hold to if they could measure how it and the one direction or in the other direction.
This was done over these close to 10 years ago, and they could observe all troops, but they were very small and they were not quantised.
it was not an integer quantum hall effect, if you want, but it was a simulation of the classical hall effect.
And this was basically where things are regarding free space and regarding weak lattices.
There was another direction which is maybe more fruitful, which is going into deep lattices and going to type binding models.
And that's what we're going to talk about next. How can I create artificial gauge fields in a tight binding model?
the idea here is now let's look at the last phase factor that we have to discuss payouts phases.
Pilot phases is basically just saying, let me take and let us let us craft.
Let me take Hopkins and if we make some of those Hopkins complex.
the wait on my Hamiltonian, I would just say this example, for instance, to hopping in the vertical direction.
Just that is just the same. But if I think about the hopping in a horizontal direction again, the AKP takes you to the AK to India.
I get different phases, phases, my wavefunction.
When I just hop around, I just take a complex hopping elements an extra phase factor whenever I hop from one site to the next.
And if I do this, this  phase it to acquire, if I want one cat fights, if I one minus my two in this case.
This simulates the effect of a magnetic flux, because this is exactly the same as the hand of boom phase.
If you have a charged particle, if you would have a magnetic flux encapsulated in this unit, so.
you just need to make your shopping complex and you need to make your shopping complex in a way that's basically dependent.
do you have especially repentant backed up potential and then you can get a magnetic field or an effective magnetic field out of this?
Does anyone has an idea how we would do this? How can you make your shopping complex?
What it's maybe a hard question to ask, because the answer is maybe not so obvious.
Before we get to that, just quickly something about my colleague Unités.
If you have no office where you a quiet office fi going around one placard, then this phase pie can in principle, be anything.
It doesn't need to be liked. It doesn't need to be related to Feyenoord, the magnetic flux quantum, which would be a perspective to pay.
However, what you can always we can almost always do is you can say that's created because the so-called magnetic units,
which is a super containing several unit cells, just caters to between things.
Such tough luck that the flux to this whole magnetic unit cell is just a multiple of two PI.
If you, for instance, would say, if I have a flux of PI over two and this and paper two in every cell,
and if I go to four four units out, I go, they're going to pay.
And this is not saying I have a super lattice with four lattice sites pursued by lattice,
which then tells me they now expect that there's one band that originally had with split into force up bands.
basically, what get you in this case is I get that split into end magnetics happens and all generality,
and they would be subject to some of the Chernov as well as this happens would be zero.
it's  interesting to look at all of those happens and see how many
you have and what  configuration and how many assumptions you have.
We virtually just depend on this factor fi, how much pace you pick up per unit.
when you hop around. If it's pie, then you just have, like, say, two units, do you expect to bend if it's a pie of a two,
you expect four units, so you expect for bands and so on. And then one of the first person to look at this systematically removed data,
and then he came up with this  plot that was  one of the first fractal structures showing up in physics.
And it's now famous, hopefully the butterfly and probably some of you will have seen this picture somewhere on the internet at one point or the other.
I see a few people nodding, but not too many. OK, so what do you got here?
What you brought here is the plot,
the energy spectrum in a normalised form and applauded as a function of the flux Phi Phi and units of fine not can go from zero to one.
If you look at zero, the very edgy you get one line going from up here to down there, that's one single event.
That's the bet that you have about the absence of magnetic flux.
If you look at the next obvious points here, point of one third this year you see three lines, you see this line here,
the line here in the middle and the line up here because you have three bands,
you see, there's no three bands separated by band gaps, three nice bands.
What you also will see is that away from these simple fractions, one half, one third and so on.
Stuff looks pretty, pretty complicated and pretty pretty fractal. And that's by design.
Because if I take say, for instance, any irrational flux where a fight over Panopto stock just a rational number, then it could end going to infinity.
I have infinitely many points of view, many bands. And yeah, so it's really a fractal.
If I go to something with whatever, 17 over seventy nine and a half seventy nine bands.
That becomes very, very complicated. we have this factor energy structure.
You might be asking if I look at one half, I see it as one banshee in the middle.
Well, actually, it's two bands, it's one band going from down here to appear in the middle and another band from here to there.
There's no guarantee that these bands must be separated by band caps.
They can be touching, but still, we know it's two bands because we know there's two solutions for each quasi momentum.
And it looks a bit a butterfly, that's what they call it, hopefully this butterfly. OK.
Now back to how can we implement these payouts phases? The way it was done and this was done, they're in a whole series of experiments for many,
Heidelberg was the main person and this is to say, well, if we want to do complex hopping,
say along the extraction, the first thing we have to do is we have to stop this real hopping, to bear hopping, to bear tunnelling in the X direction.
And the easiest way of doing that is to say, let's do that as such that we have a delta here that you need from,
let's say, to let the site that's much bigger than the original. that and tunnelling can't happen because the energies don't match.
then you end up with basically hopping along the y direction, but no hopping along the.
And then what you can do is something to be called laser assisted hopping or laser induced hopping or Ramon assisted tunnelling,
which is basically saying let's put into extra laser beams one here, one there.
And it's put him in such that the edit, the frequency difference between these two laser beams is exactly delta.
Which is basically saying, if I observe a photon from one laser beam and emitted into the other laser beam, I gain or lose an energy of data.
And if that data is exactly the same as this data here, then this now restores the tunnelling.
I can do a laser assisted tunnelling, whereby if swabbing a and from one laser emitting another laser, I go from one little site to the next.
That's the area. And then you can ask, OK, what happens now to the phase pictures?
What do I get phases? Well, if I absorb and amid a photo, they're always absorbing images, also the phase of the laser beam.
to phase it, I get by doing so depends on what the phase into the eye of this laser beam and that laser beam is at a position of doing this.
And because Italy ICAC's of the one that Italy likewise, if the other one, of course, battery dependent.
The crucial point is that the phase factor I get out of this is basically dependent.
if I jump here and then maybe go up some direction, why didn't we jump back or we get another phase up here from the laser beams?
Then it got down here, so if it didn't go for a loop, I would have acquired a phase while going through this.
That's the main idea. And you can basically just take geometry and calculate if I have a given key vectors of my lasers, hear this case.
They're  orthogonal, but they don't have to be.
I can put them in any  angle and I can calculate just from this angle and the key vectors.
What is the magnetic fox that will be simulating?
Because that tells me what is the difference, the difference in the phase vectors of the different popping elements at the different points?
Strictly speaking, because we now have to start and not being on zero.
This whole Hamiltonian this whole time depends why, because we have to each acre x minus omega T,
we have a tiny bit of omega one minus omega two times T, and they're so strictly speaking.
It is also a special case of this  flukey engineering of this  Truven Hamiltonian.
And you don't have to have to phase up to two laser beams. We just  also shaking in a certain way.
you can also think about it in this way.
But very often people say, OK, let's only consiter the resulting effect of time independent Hamiltonian, which people don't quite know.
Harper hopefully the Hamiltonian, which is the Hamiltonian where you just say,
let's put complex toppings on all of the toppings in one direction and then have those peas basically dependent.
And that's exactly the way that they diagonals. When you got this plot to move to the butterfly, they showed you on a previously.
what can you do with this? The first example that you can do is people did something where they said, Okay,
let's take a super lattice and the X in the direction so that we have
little placards and just no time and coupling between the placards. we just put particles on a of foresight lattice.
And if you put particles on a superposition of these two sites initially say here we can measure all the particles are of super lattice techniques
and we can look at the time evolution of the particles so we can look at the expectation value of X and Y of the particle as a function of time.
And this plot here shows you, many, many measurements and clue to is  off the dots.
It's  the way time progresses.
And I guess the main thing to say here is this is something that also gets around this in the time, in the time or at fashion.
you really see that it starts off field that is really going clockwise. It's a little Typekit in motion.
It's really the particles  doing Typekit and motion on this little site Bloch at.
it really shows you one of the main effects that we would expect from coal that from from the magnetic field, you do see cycles in orbit.
You can do the next thing which they then did was to say, OK, let's connect many of these little black heads up together to one dimensional stripes.
And what they could show then by looking at the flow of the particles and the currents of the particles,
they could show the analogue to what you normally have in a superconductor device.
No effect would actually get a surphase current to  counteract the external magnetic field.
they could show here that because of these pacemakers you get,
you get something where particles are flowing upwards on the hand site and downwards on the left hand site.
The cable covered so current, it has a corollary to it it's going counterclockwise direction, but not the clockwise direction or vice versa.
And then the latest experiment in this one,
and this is the last experiment I want to show it is to say we can try to measure the high response so we can try to say, let's take a cloud.
Put a force in one direction to take a cloud with this  pilot's phases,
with this laser system stopping going on now at an additional force in one direction to
push the particles in one direction and then measure up a cloud move siteways measures,
if ever there is an animator's velocity. the external fast and I do have an optical gradient,
so they put a big laser beam somewhere where the clouds are sitting on the edge of the laser beam,
so they see an intensity gradient so that I can potentially see force pushing
them in one direction and then they measure what happens in the other direction.
They now do the pilots paces again, but they do them in a slightly different scheme for technical reasons,
and they get a phase off to PI over four. they get that for the two sites now do one of doing one of those magnetic units out,
which basically means that they are now in this situation and the hopefully the butterfly.
There's four bands one band down here, 20 in the middle of which touch yet at this point and another band up here.
We noted a number of the some of the numbers must be zero.
That's what we get on with the butterfly.
But we also know that we can have a situation where if you go to the parameters, the lowest band would have a higher number of one.
The upper bands would also have a minimum of plus one,
and the two bands in the middle of attaching have a combined channel of minus one to make all of this viable.
And then they had to get a lot of ideas into it from how do I go from a non topological
Hamiltonian into a topological system in such a way that they end up only in this lowest band?
That's a big problem, actually, if I have a non topological system,
how do I make a topological with all the populating all four of those bands and therefore not having any effect?
But they managed to do this, they managed to put all of the particles in this lowest band at the time to with zero.
And this now is my final slide. Hence I'm rushing a little bit.
What they look at now is they say we look at the differential shift where the particles,
if I put a in is that direction move to the left or to the right.
There's two plots in here one place with the force and the plus that direction one force in the minus direction.
And you can see that in the one case, the drift in one direction. In the other case, they drift in the other direction.
here you see, this is differential density measurements.
you take two.
Density measurements, one before, one after, and you look at the difference between them, you see that if you do this and this  case,
you see those blue,
red and you have a case he does where plumes of the particles are moving a little bit to the left or a little bit to the right.
And you can see as a function of time how many observations you do, you can see that initially there was a straight line here initially.
They are moving initially you see a shift, you see this Bloch to that. You would expect this whole trip that you would expect.
What you also see is that, well, that  stops after a while after 120 milliseconds, the particles are not moving anymore.
The answer for that is that for longer times, dispensary population.
Because when you try a system, when you shake a system to give if a proven system in the Iraqi case,
then what you also have you allow the system to absorb energy from the drive and go to other states.
that means that the system is not confined to the lowest energy band anymore,
but can be redistributed to all of the energy bands and with mapping techniques with time of flight, they control it.
That's what's happening.
they can show that they expect nothing to happen here anymore because the system now isn't equipped with equal mix of all four bands.
But for the small part, down here, you can do a fit, and if you do a fit,
you get something where to expect extract is zero point nine, nine, seven or above or five.
it's very, very, very compatible with the theoretical value of one.
this can be seen as like, yes, this is a first observation of the integer quantum hall effect in atoms.
It has a lot of caveats, I should say it's not in full glory, right, because it's not a steady state that stays forever.
It's a transient effect. It's only there for the first couple of milliseconds before it gets away.
But it shows that it can be done in principle.
this was 2015, so six, seven years ago, and people have now put a lot of time in understanding of limitations.
How can we do this in a way to not have this bad redistribution later on?
How can we extend this to a longer times? Because if you want to go to the fractional quantum hall, you want to combine this with strong interactions.
We need to have the system being alive and being topological for a half a second because of the interactions.
Everything is more fragile and go slower.
But I think it just shows you that this is maybe it will end quantum simulations are far from at the end of what they can do.
They are still pretty exciting things that will come up in the next couple of years, going to what fractional quantum hall on this site,
going towards the antiferromagnetic spin liquids and other interesting quantum states and quantum magnetism.
There's many, many developments that are currently underway. Lots of things are going to come.
OK. And this stunt is the official end of the course.
Thank you very much.
